David Goggins, former Navy SEAL and internationally renowned endurance athlete, certainly has a world of expertise when it comes to strength and perseverance. 

He’s been well acquainted with pain and adversity—from poverty and abuse in childhood to racism—and both success and failure. 

Life is not easy, Goggins knows and stresses, but your decisions and your mindset can go a long way towards improving your happiness. 

So, if you’re looking for a large dose of inspiration or need a little push to get over a proverbial hump, there's no better place to start than with these 30 quotes from Goggins’s bestselling audiobook, Can’t Hurt Me.

"You are in danger of living a life so comfortable and soft that you will die without ever realizing your true potential."

"It's a lot more than mind over matter. It takes relentless self-discipline to schedule suffering into your day, every day."

"Denial is the ultimate comfort zone."

"The most important conversations you’ll ever have are the ones you’ll have with yourself."

"Pain unlocks a secret doorway in the mind, one that leads to both peak performance and beautiful silence."

"Don't stop when you're tired. Stop when you're done."

"Everyone fails sometimes and life isn’t supposed to be fair, much less bend to your every whim."

"You must recognize what you are about to do, highlight what you do not like about it, and spend time visualizing each and every obstacle you can."

"The ticket to victory often comes down to bringing your very best when you feel your worst."

"Most wars are won or lost in our own heads."

"It may be satisfactory, but that's another word for mediocrity."

"Are you an experienced scuba diver? Great, shed your gear, take a deep breath and become a one-hundred-foot free diver. Are you a badass triathlete? Cool, learn how to rock climb. Are you enjoying a wildly successful career? Wonderful, learn a new language or skill. Get a second degree. Always be willing to embrace ignorance and become the dumb fuck in the classroom again, because that is the only way to expand your body of knowledge and body of work. It’s the only way to expand your mind."

"We’re either getting better or we’re getting worse."

"Breaking the shackles and stretching beyond our own perceived limits takes hard fucking work—oftentimes physical work—and when you put yourself on the line, self doubt and pain will greet you with a stinging combination that will buckle your knees."

"Always be ready to adjust, recalibrate, and stay after it to become better, somehow."

"If you want to master the mind and remove your governor, you’ll have to become addicted to hard work. Because passion and obsession, even talent, are only useful tools if you have the work ethic to back them up."

"Most of us sweep our failures and evil secrets under the rug, but when we run into problems, that rug gets lifted up, and our darkness re-emerges, floods our soul, and influences the decisions which determine our character."

"My happiness is my reflection on the suffering during my journey and knowing that I never quit nor was I guided by anybody on this earth."

"A lot of us surround ourselves with people who speak to our desire for comfort. People who would rather treat the pain of our wounds and prevent further injury than help us callous over them and try again. We need to surround ourselves with people who will tell us what we need to hear, not what we want to hear, but at the same time not make us feel we’re up against the impossible."

"My mother was my biggest fan. Whenever I failed in life she was always asking me when and where I would go after it again. She never said, Well, maybe it isn’t meant to be."

"The Buddha famously said that life is suffering. I’m not a Buddhist, but I know what he meant and so do you. To exist in this world, we must contend with humiliation, broken dreams, sadness, and loss. That’s just nature."

"We can’t control all the variables in our lives. It’s about what we do with opportunities revoked or presented to us that determine how a story ends."

"In every failure there is something to be gained, even if it’s only practice for the next test you’ll have to take. Because that next test is coming. That’s a guarantee."

"I knew that the confidence I’d managed to develop didn’t come from a perfect family or God-given talent. It came from personal accountability which brought me self-respect, and self-respect will always light a way forward."

"There is no more time to waste. Hours and days evaporate like creeks in the desert. That’s why it’s okay to be cruel to yourself as long as you realize you’re doing it to become better."

"Be more than motivated, be more than driven, become literally obsessed to the point where people think you're fucking nuts."

"It takes great strength to be vulnerable enough to put your ass on the line, in public, and work toward a dream that feels like it’s slipping away."

"Human beings change through study, habit, and stories... when you’re driven, whatever is in front of you, whether it’s racism, sexism, injuries, divorce, depression, obesity, tragedy, or poverty, becomes fuel for your metamorphosis."

"We all need small sparks, small accomplishments in our lives to fuel the big ones. Think of your small accomplishments as kindling. When you want a bonfire, you don’t start by lighting a big log. You collect some witch’s hair—a small pile of hay or some dry, dead grass. You light that, and then add small sticks and bigger sticks before you feed your tree stump into the blaze. Because it’s the small sparks, which start small fires, that eventually build enough heat to burn the whole fucking forest down."

"The hero is you."

CONTENTSINTRODUCTION1. 

I SHOULD HAVE BEEN A STATISTIC2. 

TRUTH HURTS3. 

THE IMPOSSIBLE TASK4. 

TAKING SOULS5. 

ARMORED MIND6. 

IT’S NOT ABOUT A TROPHY7. 

THE MOST POWERFUL WEAPON8. 

TALENT NOT REQUIRED9. 

UNCOMMON AMONGST UNCOMMON10. 

THE EMPOWERMENT OF FAILURE11. 

WHAT IF?ACKNOWLEDGMENTSABOUT THE AUTHOR WARNING ORDERTIME ZONE: 24/7TASK ORGANIZATION: SOLO MISSION  1. 

SITUATION: You are in danger of living a life so comfortable and soft that   you will die without ever realizing your true potential. 

2. 

MISSION: To unshackle your mind. 

Ditch the victim’s mentality forever. 

 Own all aspects of your life completely. 

Build an unbreakable foundation. 

3. 

EXECUTION:     A. 

Read this cover to cover. 

Study the techniques within, accept all ten challenges. 

Repeat. 

Repetition will callous your mind. 

   B. 

If you do your job to the best of your ability, this will hurt. 

This mission is not about making yourself feel better. 

This mission is about being better and having a greater impact on the world. 

   C. 

Don’t stop when you are tired. 

Stop when you are done. 

4. 

CLASSIFIED: This is the origin story of a hero. 

The hero is you. 

BY COMMAND OF: DAVID GOGGINSSIGNED:RANK AND SERVICE: CHIEF, U. 

S. 

NAVY SEALS,     INTRODUCTIONDo you know who you really are and what you’re capable of?I’m sure you think so, but just because you believe something doesn’t make it true. 

Denial is the ultimate comfort zone. 

Don’t worry, you aren’t alone. 

In every town, in every country, all over the world, millions roam the streets, dead-eyed as zombies, addicted to comfort, embracing a victim’s mentality and unaware of their true potential. 

I know this because I meet and hear from them all the time, and because just like you, I used to be one of them. 

I had a damn good excuse too. 

Life dealt me a bad hand. 

I was born broken, grew up with beat downs, wastormented in school, and called nigger more times than I could count. 

We were once poor, surviving on welfare, living in government-subsidized housing,and my depression was smothering. 

I lived life at the bottom of the barrel, and myfuture forecast was bleak as fuck. 

Very few people know how the bottom feels, but I do. 

It’s like quicksand. 

It grabsyou, sucks you under, and won’t let go. 

When life is like that it’s easy to drift andcontinue to make the same comfortable choices that are killing you, over and overagain. 

But the truth is we all make habitual, self-limiting choices. 

It’s as natural as a sunsetand as fundamental as gravity. 

It’s how our brains are wired, which is whymotivation is crap. 

Even the best pep talk or self-help hack is nothing but a temporary fix. 

It won’trewire your brain. 

It won’t amplify your voice or uplift your life. 

Motivationchanges exactly nobody. 

The bad hand that was my life was mine, and mine aloneto fix. 

So I sought out pain, fell in love with suffering, and eventually transformed myselffrom the weakest piece of shit on the planet into the hardest man God ever created,or so I tell myself. 

Odds are you have had a much better childhood than I did, and even now mighthave a damn decent life, but no matter who you are, who your parents are or were,where you live, what you do for a living, or how much money you have, you’reprobably living at about 40 percent of your true capability. 

Damn shame. 

We all have the potential to be so much more. 

Years ago, I was invited to be on a panel at the Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology. 

I’d never set foot in a university lecture hall as a student. 

I’d barelygraduated high school, yet I was at one of the most prestigious institutions in thecountry to discuss mental toughness with a handful of others. 

At some point in the discussion an esteemed MIT professor said that we each have genetic limitations. 

Hard ceilings. 

That there are some things we just can’t do no matter how mentallytough we are. 

When we hit our genetic ceiling, he said, mental toughness doesn’tenter into the equation. 

Everyone in that room seemed to accept his version of reality because this senior,tenured professor was known for researching mental toughness. 

It was his life’swork. 

It was also a bunch of bullshit, and to me he was using science to let us all offthe hook. 

I’d been quiet until then because I was surrounded by all these smart people, feelingstupid, but someone in the audience noticed the look on my face and asked if Iagreed. 

And if you ask me a direct question, I won’t be shy. 

“There’s something to be said for living it instead of studying it,” I said, then turnedtoward the professor. 

“What you said is true for most people, but not 100 percent. 

There will always be the 1 percent of us who are willing to put in the work to defythe odds. 

”I went on to explain what I knew from experience. 

That anybody can become atotally different person and achieve what so-called experts like him claim isimpossible, but it takes a lot of heart, will, and an armored mind. 

Heraclitus, a philosopher born in the Persian Empire back in the fifth century BC,had it right when he wrote about men on the battlefield. 

“Out of every one hundredmen,” he wrote, “ten shouldn’t even be there, eighty are just targets, nine are thereal fighters, and we are lucky to have them, for they make the battle. 

Ah, but theone, one is a warrior…”From the time you take your first breath, you become eligible to die. 

You alsobecome eligible to find your greatness and become the One Warrior. 

But it is up toyou to equip yourself for the battle ahead. 

Only you can master your mind, which iswhat it takes to live a bold life filled with accomplishments most people considerbeyond their capability. 

I am not a genius like those professors at MIT, but I am that One Warrior. 

And thestory you are about to read, the story of my fucked-up life, will illuminate a provenpath to self-mastery and empower you to face reality, hold yourself accountable,push past pain, learn to love what you fear, relish failure, live to your fullestpotential, and find out who you really are. 

Human beings change through study, habit, and stories. 

Through my story you willlearn what the body and mind are capable of when they’re driven to maximumcapacity, and how to get there. 

Because when you’re driven, whatever is in front ofyou, whether it’s racism, sexism, injuries, divorce, depression, obesity, tragedy, orpoverty, becomes fuel for your metamorphosis. 

The steps laid out here amount to the evolutionary algorithm, one that obliteratesbarriers, glimmers with glory, and delivers lasting peace. 

I hope you’re ready. 

It’s time to go to war with yourself. 

 OceanofPDF. 

com   CHAPTER ONE 1. 

I SHOULD HAVE BEEN A STATISTICWe found hell in a beautiful neighborhood. 

In 1981, Williamsville offered thetastiest real estate in Buffalo, New York. 

Leafy and friendly, its safe streets weredotted with dainty homes filled with model citizens. 

Doctors, attorneys, steel plantexecutives, dentists, and professional football players lived there with their adoringwives and their 2. 

2 kids. 

Cars were new, roads swept, possibilities endless. 

We’retalking about a living, breathing American Dream. 

Hell was a corner lot onParadise Road. 

That’s where we lived in a two-story, four-bedroom, white wooden home with foursquare pillars framing a front porch that led to the widest, greenest lawn inWilliamsville. 

We had a vegetable garden out back and a two-car garage stockedwith a 1962 Rolls Royce Silver Cloud, a 1980 Mercedes 450 SLC, and, in thedriveway, a sparkling new 1981 black Corvette. 

Everyone on Paradise Road livednear the top of the food chain, and based on appearances, most of our neighborsthought that we, the so-called happy, well-adjusted Goggins family, were the tip ofthat spear. 

But glossy surfaces reflect much more than they reveal. 

They’d see us most weekday mornings, gathered in the driveway at 7 a. 

m. 

My dad,Trunnis Goggins, wasn’t tall but he was handsome and built like a boxer. 

He woretailored suits, his smile warm and open. 

He looked every bit the successfulbusinessman on his way to work. 

My mother, Jackie, was seventeen years younger,slender and beautiful, and my brother and I were clean cut, well dressed in jeansand pastel Izod shirts, and strapped with backpacks just like the other kids. 

Thewhite kids. 

In our version of affluent America, each driveway was a staging groundfor nods and waves before parents and children rode off to work and school. 

Neighbors saw what they wanted. 

Nobody probed too deep. 

Good thing. 

The truth was, the Goggins family had just returned home from anotherall-nighter in the hood, and if Paradise Road was Hell, that meant I lived with theDevil himself. 

As soon as our neighbors shut the door or turned the corner, myfather’s smile morphed into a scowl. 

He barked orders and went inside to sleepanother one off, but our work wasn’t done. 

My brother, Trunnis Jr. 

, and I hadsomewhere to be, and it was up to our sleepless mother to get us there. 

I was in first grade in 1981, and I was in a school daze, for real. 

Not because theacademics were hard—at least not yet—but because I couldn’t stay awake. 

Theteacher’s sing-song voice was my lullaby, my crossed arms on my desk, a comfypillow, and her sharp words—once she caught me dreaming—an unwelcome alarmclock that wouldn’t stop blaring. 

Children that young are infinite sponges. 

Theysoak up language and ideas at warp speed to establish a fundamental foundation upon which most people build life-long skills like reading and spelling and basicmath, but because I worked nights, I couldn’t concentrate on anything mostmornings, except trying to stay awake. 

Recess and PE were a whole different minefield. 

Out on the playground stayinglucid was the easy part. 

The hard part was the hiding. 

Couldn’t let my shirt slip. 

Couldn’t wear shorts. 

Bruises were red flags I couldn’t show because if I did, Iknew I’d catch even more. 

Still, on that playground and in the classroom I knew Iwas safe, for a little while at least. 

It was the one place he couldn’t reach me, atleast not physically. 

My brother went through a similar dance in sixth grade, hisfirst year in middle school. 

He had his own wounds to hide and sleep to harvest,because once that bell rang, real life began. 

The ride from Williamsville to the Masten District in East Buffalo took about a halfan hour, but it may as well have been a world away. 

Like much of East Buffalo,Masten was a mostly black working-class neighborhood in the inner city that wasrough around the edges; though, in the early 1980s, it was not yet completely ghettoas fuck. 

Back then the Bethlehem Steel plant was still humming and Buffalo wasthe last great American steel town. 

Most men in the city, black and white, workedsolid union jobs and earned a living wage, which meant business in Masten wasgood. 

For my dad, it always had been. 

By the time he was twenty years old he owned a Coca-Cola distribution concessionand four delivery routes in the Buffalo area. 

That’s good money for a kid, but hehad bigger dreams and an eye on the future. 

His future had four wheels and a discofunk soundtrack. 

When a local bakery shut down, he leased the building and builtone of Buffalo’s first roller skating rinks. 

Fast-forward ten years and Skateland had been relocated to a building on FerryStreet that stretched nearly a full block in the heart of the Masten District. 

Heopened a bar above the rink, which he named the Vermillion Room. 

In the 1970s,that was the place to be in East Buffalo, and it’s where he met my mother when shewas just nineteen and he was thirty-six. 

It was her first time away from home. 

Jackie grew up in the Catholic Church. 

Trunnis was the son of a minister, and knewher language well enough to masquerade as a believer, which appealed to her. 

Butlet’s keep it real. 

She was just as drunk on his charm. 

Trunnis Jr. 

was born in 1971. 

I was born in 1975, and by the time I was six yearsold, the roller disco craze was at its absolute peak. 

Skateland rocked every night. 

We’d usually get there around 5 p. 

m. 

, and while my brother worked the concessionstand—popping corn, grilling hot dogs, loading the cooler, and making pizzas—Iorganized the skates by size and style. 

Each afternoon, I stood on a step stool tospray my stock with aerosol deodorizer and replace the rubber stoppers. 

Thataerosol stink would cloud all around my head and live in my nostrils. 

My eyeslooked permanently bloodshot. 

It was the only thing I could smell for hours. 

Butthose were the distractions I had to ignore to stay organized and on hustle. 

Becausemy dad, who worked the DJ booth, was always watching, and if any of those skateswent missing, it meant my ass. 

Before the doors opened I’d polish the skate rinkfloor with a dust mop that was twice my size. 

      Skateland, age sixAt around 6 p. 

m. 

, my mother called us to dinner in the back office. 

That womanlived in a permanent state of denial, but her maternal instinct was real, and it made abig fucking show of itself, grasping for any shred of normalcy. 

Every night in thatoffice, she’d set out two electric burners on the floor, sit with her legs curled behindher, and prepare a full dinner—roast meat, potatoes, green beans, and dinner rolls,while my dad did the books and made calls. 

The food was good, but even at six and seven years old I knew our “family dinner”was a bullshit facsimile compared to what most families had. 

Plus, we ate fast. 

There was no time to enjoy it because at 7 p. 

m. 

when the doors opened, it was showtime, and we all had to be in our places with our stations prepped. 

My dad was thesheriff, and once he stepped into the DJ booth he had us triangulated. 

He scannedthat room like an all-seeing eye, and if you fucked up you’d hear about it. 

Unless you felt it first. 

The room didn’t look like much under the harsh, overhead house lights, but once hedimmed them, the show lights bathed the rink in red and glanced off the spinningmirror ball, conjuring a skate disco fantasy. 

Weekend or weeknight, hundreds ofskaters piled through that door. 

Most of the time they came in as a family, payingtheir $3 entrance fee and half-dollar skate fee before hitting the floor. 

I rented out the skates and managed that entire station by myself. 

I carried that stepstool around like a crutch. 

Without it, the customers couldn’t even see me. 

Thebigger-sized skates were down below the counter, but the smaller sizes were storedso high I’d have to scale the shelves, which always made the customers laugh. 

Momwas the one and only cashier. 

She collected everyone’s cover charge, and toTrunnis, money was everything. 

He counted the people as they came in, calculatinghis take in real time so he had a rough idea of what to expect when he counted outthe register after we closed up. 

And it had better all be there. 

All the money was his. 

The rest of us never earned a cent for our sweat. 

In fact, mymother was never given any money of her own. 

She had no bank account or creditcards in her name. 

He controlled everything, and we all knew what would happen ifher cash drawer ever came up short. 

None of the customers who came through our doors knew any of this, of course. 

Tothem, Skateland was a family-owned-and-operated dream cloud. 

My dad spun thefading vinyl echoes of disco and funk and the early rumbles of hip hop. 

Bassbounced off the red walls, courtesy of Buffalo’s favorite son Rick James, GeorgeClinton’s Funkadelic, and the first tracks ever released by hip hop innovators RunDMC. 

Some of the kids were speed skating. 

I liked to go fast too, but we had ourshare of skate dancers, and that floor got funky. 

For the first hour or two the parents stayed downstairs and skated, or watched theirkids spin the oval, but they would eventually leak upstairs to make their own scene,and when enough of them made their move, Trunnis slipped out of the DJ booth sohe could join them. 

My dad was considered the unofficial mayor of Masten, and hewas a phony politician to the core. 

His customers were his marks, and what theydidn’t know was that no matter how many drinks he poured on the house and brohugs he shared, he didn’t give a fuck about any of them. 

They were all dollar signsto him. 

If he poured you a drink for free, it was because he knew you would buytwo or three more. 

While we had our share of all-night skates and twenty-four-hour skate marathons,the Skateland doors typically closed at 10 p. 

m. 

That’s when my mother, brother, andI went to work, fishing bloody tampons out of shit-filled toilets, airing the lingeringcannabis haze out of both bathrooms, scraping bacteria-loaded gum off the rinkfloor, cleaning the concession kitchen, and taking inventory. 

Just before midnight,we’d slog into the office, half-dead. 

Our mother would tuck my brother and mebeneath a blanket on the office sofa, our heads opposite one another, as the ceilingshook with the sound of bass-heavy funk. 

Mom was still on the clock. 

 As soon as she stepped inside the bar, Trunnis had her working the door or hustlingdownstairs like a booze mule to fetch cases of liquor from the basement. 

There wasalways some menial task to perform and she didn’t stop moving, while my fatherkept watch from his corner of the bar where he could take in the whole scene. 

Inthose days, Rick James, a Buffalo native and one of my father’s closest friends,stopped by whenever he was in town, parking his Excalibur on the sidewalk outfront. 

His car was a billboard that let the hood know a Superfreak was in the house. 

He wasn’t the only celebrity that came through. 

OJ Simpson was one of the NFL’sbiggest stars, and he and his Buffalo Bills teammates were regulars, as was TeddyPendergrass and Sister Sledge. 

If you don’t know the names, look them up. 

Maybe if I had been older, or my father had been a good man, I might have hadsome pride in being part of a cultural moment like that, but young kids aren’t aboutthat life. 

It’s almost like, no matter who our parents are and what they do, we’re allborn with a moral compass that’s properly tuned. 

When you’re six, seven, or eightyears old, you know what feels right and what feels way the fuck off. 

And whenyou are born into a cyclone of terror and pain, you know it doesn’t have to be thatway, and that truth nags at you like a splinter in your jacked up mind. 

You canchoose to ignore it, but the dull throbbing is always there as the days and nightsbleed together into one blurred memory. 

Some moments do stick out though, and one I’m thinking of right now still hauntsme. 

That was the night my mom stepped into the bar before she was expected andfound my dad sweet talking a woman about ten years her junior. 

Trunnis saw herwatching and shrugged while my mother eyeballed him and slugged two shots ofJohnnie Walker Red to calm her nerves. 

He noticed her reaction and didn’t like itone damn bit. 

She knew how things were. 

That Trunnis ran prostitutes across the border to FortErie in Canada. 

A summer cottage belonging to the president of one of Buffalo’sbiggest banks doubled as his pop-up brothel. 

He introduced Buffalo bankers to hisgirls whenever he needed a longer line of credit, and those loans always camethrough. 

My mom knew the young woman she was watching was one of the girls inhis stable. 

She’d seen her before. 

Once, she walked in on them fucking on theSkateland office sofa, where she tucked her children in damn near every night. 

When she found them together, the woman smiled at her. 

Trunnis shrugged. 

No, mymom wasn’t clueless, but seeing it with her own eyes always burned. 

Around midnight, my mother drove with one of our security guards to make a bankdeposit. 

He begged her to leave my father. 

He told her to leave that very night. 

Maybe he knew what was coming. 

She did too, but she couldn’t run because shehad no independent means whatsoever, and she wasn’t going to leave us in hishands. 

Plus, she had no rights to community property because Trunnis had alwaysrefused to marry her, which was a riddle she was only then starting to solve. 

Mymother came from a solid, middle class family, and had always been the virtuoustype. 

He resented that, treated his hookers better than the mother of his sons, and asa result he had her trapped. 

She was 100 percent dependent, and if she wanted toleave, she’d have to walk with nothing at all. 

My brother and I never slept well at Skateland. 

The ceiling shook too much becausethe office was directly below the dance floor. 

When my mother walked in that nightI was already awake. 

She smiled, but I noticed the tears in her eyes and remember smelling the scotch on her breath when she scooped me up in her arms as tenderlyas she could. 

My father trailed in after her, sloppy and annoyed. 

He pulled a pistolfrom beneath the cushion where I slept (yes, you read that right, there was a loadedgun under the cushion on which I slept at six years old!), flashed it at me, andsmiled before concealing it beneath his pant leg in an ankle holster. 

In his otherhand were two brown paper shopping bags filled with nearly $10,000 in cash. 

Sofar it was a typical night. 

My parents didn’t speak on the drive home, though the tension between themsimmered. 

My mom pulled into the driveway on Paradise Road just before 6 a. 

m. 

, alittle early by our standards. 

Trunnis stumbled from the car, disabled the alarm,dropped the cash on the kitchen table, and went upstairs. 

We followed him, and shetucked us both into our beds, kissed me on the forehead, and turned out the lightbefore slipping into the master suite where she found him waiting, stroking hisleather belt. 

Trunnis didn’t appreciate being glared at by my mom, especially inpublic. 

“This belt came all the way from Texas just to whip you,” he said, calmly. 

Then hestarted swinging it, buckle first. 

Sometimes my mother fought back, and she didthat night. 

She threw a marble candlestick at his head. 

He ducked and it thudded thewall. 

She ran into the bathroom, locked the door, and cowered on the toilet. 

Hekicked the door down and backhanded her hard. 

Her head slammed into the wall. 

She was barely conscious when he grabbed a fistful of her hair and dragged herdown the hall. 

By then my brother and I had heard the violence, and we watched him drag her allthe way down the stairs to the first floor, then crouch over her with the belt in hishand. 

She was bleeding from the temple and the lip, and the sight of her blood lit afuse in me. 

In that moment my hatred overcame my fear. 

I ran downstairs andjumped on his back, slammed my tiny fists into his back, and scratched at his eyes. 

I’d caught him off guard and he fell to one knee. 

I wailed on him. 

“Don’t hit my mom!” I yelled. 

He tossed me to the ground, stalked toward me, beltin hand, then turned toward my mother. 

“You’re raising a gangster,” he said, half-smiling. 

I curled into a ball when he started swinging his belt at me. 

I could feel bruises riseon my back as my mom crawled toward the control pad near the front door. 

Shepressed the panic button and the house exploded in alarm. 

He froze, looked towardthe ceiling, mopped his brow with his sleeve, took a deep breath, looped andbuckled his belt, and went upstairs to wash off all that evil and hate. 

Police were ontheir way, and he knew it. 

My mother’s relief was short-lived. 

When the cops arrived, Trunnis met them at thedoor. 

They looked over his shoulder toward my mom, who stood several pacesbehind him, her face swollen and caked with dried blood. 

But those were differentdays. 

There was no #metoo back then. 

That shit didn’t exist, and they ignored her. 

Trunnis told them it was all a whole lot of nothing. 

Just some necessary domesticdiscipline. 

 “Look at this house. 

Does it look like I mistreat my wife?” He asked. 

“I give hermink coats, diamond rings, I bust my ass to give her everything she wants, and shethrows a marble candlestick at my head. 

She’s spoiled. 

”The police chuckled along with my father as he walked them to their car. 

They leftwithout interviewing her. 

He didn’t hit her again that morning. 

He didn’t have to. 

The psychological damage was done. 

From that point on it was clear to us that asfar as Trunnis and the law were concerned it was open season, and we were thehunted. 

Over the next year, our schedule didn’t change much and the beatings continued,while my mother tried to paper over the darkness with swatches of light. 

She knew Iwanted to be a Scout, so she signed me up for a local troop. 

I still remember puttingon that navy blue Cub Scout button down one Saturday. 

I felt proud wearing auniform and knowing at least for a few hours I could pretend that I was a normalkid. 

My mom smiled as we headed for the door. 

My pride, her smile, wasn’t justbecause of the damn Cub Scouts. 

They rose up from a deeper place. 

We were takingaction to find something positive for ourselves in a bleak situation. 

It was proof thatwe mattered, and that we weren’t completely powerless. 

That’s when my father came home from the Vermillion Room. 

“Where you two going?” He glared at me. 

I stared at the floor. 

My mother clearedher throat. 

“I’m taking David to his first Cub Scout meeting,” she said, softly. 

“The hell you are!” I looked up, and he laughed as my eyes welled up with tears. 

“We’re going to the track. 

”Within the hour we’d arrived at Batavia Downs, an old-school harness horse racetrack, the type where jockeys ride behind the horses in lightweight buggies. 

My dadgrabbed a racing form as soon we stepped through the gate. 

For hours, the three ofus watched him place bet after bet, chain smoke, drink scotch, and raise holy hell asevery pony he bet on finished out of the money. 

With my dad raging at thegambling gods and acting a fool, I tried to make myself as small as possiblewhenever people walked by, but I still stuck out. 

I was the only kid in the standsdressed like a Cub Scout. 

I was probably the only black Cub Scout they’d ever seen,and my uniform was a lie. 

I was a pretender. 

Trunnis lost thousands of dollars that day, and he wouldn’t shut up about it on thedrive home, his raspy throat raw from nicotine. 

My brother and I were in thecramped back seat and whenever he spat out the window, his phlegm boomerangedinto my face. 

Each drop of his nasty saliva on my skin burned like venom andintensified my hate. 

I’d long since learned that the best way to avoid a beat downwas to make myself as invisible as possible, avert my eyes, float outside my body,and hope to go unnoticed. 

It was a practice we’d all honed over the years, but I wasdone with that shit. 

I would no longer hide from the Devil. 

That afternoon as heveered onto the highway and headed home, he continued to rave on, and I mad-dogged him from the back seat. 

Have you ever heard the phrase, “Faith Over Fear”?For me it was Hate Over Fear. 

 He caught my eyes in the rearview mirror. 

“You got something to say?!”“We shouldn’t have gone to the track anyway,” I said. 

My brother turned and stared at me like I’d lost my damn mind. 

My mothersquirmed in her seat. 

“Say that one more time. 

” His words came slow, dripping with dread. 

I didn’t say aword, so he started reaching behind the seat trying to smack me. 

But I was so small,it was easy to hide. 

The car veered left and right as he was half-turned in mydirection, punching air. 

He’d barely touched me, which only stoked his fire. 

Wedrove in silence until he caught his breath. 

“When we get home, you’re gonna takeyour clothes off,” he said. 

That’s what he’d say when he was ready to bestow a serious beat down, and therewas no avoiding it. 

I did what I was told. 

I went into my bedroom and took off myclothes, walked down the hall to his room, closed the door behind me, turned thelights off, then laid across the corner of the bed with my legs dangling, my torsostretched out in front of me, and my ass exposed. 

That was the protocol, and he’ddesigned it for maximum psychological and physical pain. 

The beatings were often brutal, but the anticipation was the worst part. 

I couldn’tsee the door behind me, and he’d take his time, letting my dread build. 

When Iheard him open the door, my panic spiked. 

Even then the room was so dark Icouldn’t see much with my peripheral vision, and couldn’t prepare for the firstsmack until his belt hit my skin. 

It was never just two or three lickings either. 

Therewas no particular count, so we never knew when or if he was gonna stop. 

This beating lasted minutes upon minutes. 

He started on my butt, but the sting wasso bad I blocked it with my hands, so he moved down and started whipping mythighs. 

When I dropped my hands to my thighs he swung at my lower back. 

Hebelted me dozens of times, and was breathless, coughing and slick with sweat bythe time it was over. 

I was breathing heavy too, but I wasn’t crying. 

His evil was tooreal and my hate gave me courage. 

I refused to give that motherfucker thesatisfaction. 

I just stood up, looked the Devil in his eye, limped to my room, andstood in front of a mirror. 

I was covered in welts from my neck to the crease at theknees. 

I didn’t go to school for several days. 

When you’re getting beat consistently, hope evaporates. 

You stifle your emotions,but your trauma off-gasses in unconscious ways. 

After countless beatings sheendured and witnessed, this particular beat down left my mother in a constant fog, ashell of the woman I remembered from a few years before. 

She was distracted andvacant most of the time, except when he called her name. 

Then she’d hop-to likeshe was his slave. 

I didn’t know until years later that she was considering suicide. 

My brother and I took our pain out on each other. 

We’d sit or stand across from oneanother and he would throw punches as hard as he could at me. 

It usually started outas a game, but he was four years older, much stronger, and he connected with all hispower. 

Whenever I’d fall, I’d get up and he’d hit me again, as hard as he could,yelling like a martial arts warrior at the top of his lungs, his face twisted with rage. 

 “You’re not hurting me! Is that all you fucking have?” I’d shout back. 

I wanted himto know that I could take more pain than he could ever deliver, but when it was timeto fall asleep and there were no more battles to fight, no place to hide, I wet the bed. 

Nearly every night. 

My mother’s every day was a lesson in survival. 

She was told she was worthless sooften she started to believe it. 

Everything she did was an effort to appease him so hewouldn’t beat her sons or whip her ass, but there were invisible trip wires in herworld and sometimes she never knew when or how she set them off until after heslapped the shit out of her. 

Other times she knew she teed herself up for a viciousbeat down. 

One day I came home early from school with a nasty earache and laid down on mymother’s side of their bed, my left ear throbbing in excruciating pain. 

With eachthrob my hate spiked. 

I knew I wouldn’t be going to the doctor because my fatherdidn’t approve of spending his money on doctors or dentists. 

We didn’t have healthinsurance, a pediatrician, or a dentist. 

If we got injured or sick, we were told toshake it off because he wasn’t down to pay for anything that didn’t directly benefitTrunnis Goggins. 

Our health didn’t meet that standard, and that pissed me the fuckoff. 

After about a half hour, my mother came upstairs to check on me and when I rolledonto my back she could see blood dribbling down the side of my neck and smearedall over the pillow. 

“That’s it,” she said, “come with me. 

”She got me out of bed, dressed me, and helped me to her car, but before she couldstart the engine, my dad chased us down. 

“Where you think you’re going?!”“The emergency room,” she said as she turned the ignition. 

He reached for thehandle but she peeled out first, leaving him in her dust. 

Furious, he stomped inside,slammed the door, and called out to my brother. 

“Son, get me a Johnnie Walker!” Trunnis Jr. 

brought over a bottle of Red Label anda glass from the wet bar. 

He poured and poured and watched my dad down shotafter shot. 

Each one fueled an inferno. 

“You and David need to be strong,” he raved. 

“I’m not raising a bunch of faggots! And that’s what you’ll be if you go to thedoctor every time you get a little boo boo, understand?” My brother nodded,petrified. 

“Your last name is Goggins, and we shake it off!”According to the doctor we saw that night, my mother got me to the ER just in time. 

My ear infection was so bad that if we’d waited any longer, I would have lost myhearing in my left ear for life. 

She risked her ass to save mine and we both knewshe’d pay for it. 

We drove home in eerie silence. 

My dad was still stewing at the kitchen table by the time we turned onto ParadiseRoad, and my brother was still pouring him shots. 

Trunnis Jr. 

feared our father, buthe also worshipped the man and was under his spell. 

As the first born son he wastreated better. 

Trunnis would still lash out at him, but in his warped mind, Trunnis Jr. 

was his prince. 

“When you grow up I’m gonna want to see you be the man ofyour house,” Trunnis told him. 

“And you’re gonna see me be a man tonight. 

”Moments after we walked through the front door, Trunnis beat our mothersenseless, but my brother couldn’t watch. 

Whenever the beatings exploded like athunderstorm overhead, he’d wait them out in his room. 

He ignored the darknessbecause the truth was way too heavy for him to carry. 

I always paid close fuckingattention. 

During the summers, there was no midweek respite from Trunnis, but my brotherand I learned to hop on our bikes and stay far away for as long as we could. 

Oneday, I came home for lunch and entered the house through the garage like normal. 

My father usually slept deep into the afternoon, so I figured the coast was clear. 

Iwas wrong. 

My father was paranoid. 

He did enough shady deals to attract someenemies, and he’d set the alarm after we left the house. 

When I opened the door, sirens screamed and my stomach dropped. 

I froze, backedup against the wall, and listened for footsteps. 

I heard the stairs creak and knew Iwas fucked. 

He came downstairs in his brown terrycloth robe, pistol in hand, andcrossed from the dining room into the living room, his gun out front. 

I could see thebarrel come around the corner slowly. 

As soon as he cleared the corner he could see me standing just twenty feet away, buthe didn’t drop his weapon. 

He aimed it right between my eyes. 

I stared straight athim, blank as possible, my feet anchored to the floor boards. 

There was no one elsein the house, and part of me expected him to pull the trigger, but by this time in mylife I no longer cared if I lived or died. 

I was an exhausted eight-year-old kid, plainold fucking tired of being terrified of my father, and I was sick of Skateland too. 

After a minute or two he lowered his weapon and went back upstairs. 

By now it was becoming clear that someone was going to die on Paradise Road. 

Mymother knew where Trunnis kept his . 

38. 

Some days she timed and followed him—envisioned how it would play out. 

They’d take separate cars to Skateland, she’dgrab his gun from beneath the office sofa cushions before he could get there, bringus home early, put us to bed, and wait for him by the front door with his gun inhand. 

When he pulled up, she’d step out the front door and murder him in hisdriveway—leave his body for the milkman to find. 

My uncles, her brothers, talkedher out of it, but they agreed she needed to do something drastic or she’d be the onelying dead. 

It was an old neighbor who showed her a way. 

Betty used to live across the streetfrom us and after she moved they stayed in touch. 

Betty was twenty years olderthan my mom and had the wisdom to match. 

She encouraged my mother to plan herescape weeks in advance. 

The first step was getting a credit card in her name. 

Thatmeant she had to re-earn Trunnis’ trust because she needed him to cosign. 

Betty alsoreminded my mother to keep their friendship a secret. 

For a few weeks Jackie played Trunnis, treated him like she did when she was anineteen-year-old beauty with stars in her eyes. 

She made him believe sheworshipped him again, and when she slipped a credit card application in front ofhim, he said he’d be happy to score her a little buying power. 

When the card arrivedin the mail, my mother felt its hard plastic edges through the envelope as relief saturated her mind. 

She held it at arms length and admired it. 

It glowed like agolden ticket. 

A few days later she heard my father talking shit about her on the phone to one ofhis friends, while he was having breakfast with my brother and me at the kitchentable. 

That did it. 

She walked over to the table and said, “I’m leaving your father. 

You two can stay or you can come with me. 

”My dad was stunned silent and so was my brother, but I shot out of that chair like itwas on fire, grabbed a few black garbage bags, and went upstairs to start packing. 

My brother eventually started gathering his things too. 

Before we left, the four of ushad one last pow wow at that kitchen table. 

Trunnis glared at my mother, filled withshock and contempt. 

“You have nothing and you are nothing without me,” he said. 

“You’re uneducated,you don’t have any money or prospects. 

You’ll be a prostitute inside a year. 

” Hepaused then shifted his focus to my brother and me. 

“You two are gonna grow up tobe a couple of faggots. 

And don’t think about coming back, Jackie. 

I’ll have anotherwoman here to take your place five minutes after you leave. 

”She nodded and stood. 

She’d given him her youth, her very soul, and she wasfinally finished. 

She packed as little of her past as possible. 

She left the mink coatsand the diamond rings. 

He could give them to his whore girlfriend as far as she wasconcerned. 

Trunnis watched us load up into my mom’s Volvo (the one vehicle he owned that hewouldn’t ride in), our bikes already strapped to the back. 

We drove off slowly and atfirst he didn’t budge, but before she turned the corner I could see him move towardthe garage. 

My mother floored it. 

Give her credit, she’d planned for contingencies. 

She figured he’d tail her, so shedidn’t head west to the interstate that would take us to her parent’s place in Indiana. 

Instead, she drove to Betty’s house, down a dirt construction road that my daddidn’t even know about. 

Betty had the garage door open when we arrived. 

Wepulled in. 

Betty yanked the door down, and while my father shot out on the highwayin his Corvette to chase after us, we waited right under his nose until just beforenightfall. 

By then we knew he’d be at Skateland, opening up. 

He wasn’t going tomiss a chance to make some money. 

No matter what. 

Shit went wrong about ninety miles outside of Buffalo when the old Volvo startedburning oil. 

Huge plumes of inky exhaust choked from the tail pipe and my motherspun into panic mode. 

It was as if she’d been holding it all in, stuffing her feardown deep, hiding it beneath a mask of forced composure, until an obstacleemerged and she fell apart. 

Tears streaked her face. 

“What do I do?” My mom asked, her eyes wide as saucers. 

My brother neverwanted to leave, and he told her to turn around. 

I was riding shotgun. 

She lookedover expectantly. 

“What do I do?”“We gotta go, mom,” I said. 

“Mom, we gotta go. 

” She pulled into a gas station in the middle of nowhere. 

Hysterical, she rushed to apay phone and called Betty. 

“I can’t do this, Betty,” she said. 

“The car broke down. 

I have to go back!”“Where are you?” Betty asked, calmly. 

“I don’t know,” my mom replied. 

“I have no idea where I am!”Betty told her to find a gas station attendant—every station had those back then—and put him on the phone. 

He explained we were just outside of Erie, Pennsylvania,and after Betty gave him some instructions, he put my mother back on the line. 

“Jackie, there’s a Volvo dealer in Erie. 

Find a hotel tonight and take the car theretomorrow morning. 

The attendant is going to put enough oil in the car to get youthere. 

” My mother was listening but she didn’t respond. 

“Jackie? Are you hearingme? Do what I say and it will be okay. 

”“Yeah. 

Okay,” she whispered, emotionally spent. 

“Hotel. 

Volvo dealer. 

Got it. 

”I don’t know what Erie is like now, but back then there was only one decent hotel intown: a Holiday Inn, not far from the Volvo dealership. 

My brother and I followedmy mom to the reception desk where we were hit with more bad news. 

They werefully booked. 

My mother’s shoulders slumped. 

My brother and I stood on eitherside of her, holding our clothes in black trash bags. 

We were the picture ofdesperation, and the night manager saw it. 

“Look, I’ll set you up with some rollaway beds in the conference room,” he said. 

“There’s a bathroom down there, but you have to be out early because we have aconference starting at 9 a. 

m. 

”Grateful, we bedded down in that conference room with its industrial carpet andfluorescent lights, our own personal purgatory. 

We were on the run and on theropes, but my mother hadn’t folded. 

She laid back and stared at the ceiling tilesuntil we nodded off. 

Then she slipped into an adjacent coffee shop to keep ananxious eye on our bikes, and on the road, all night long. 

We were waiting outside that Volvo dealership when the garage opened up, whichgave the mechanics just enough time to source the part we needed and get us backon the road before their day was done. 

We left Erie at sunset and drove all night,arriving at my grandparents’ house in Brazil, Indiana, eight hours later. 

My momwept as she parked next to their old wooden house before dawn, and I understoodwhy. 

Our arrival felt significant, then and now. 

I was still only eight years old, butalready in a second phase of life. 

I didn’t know what awaited me—what awaited us—in that small, rural, Southern Indiana town, and I didn’t much care. 

All I knewwas that we’d escaped from Hell, and for the first time in my life, we were freefrom the Devil himself. 

*** We stayed with my grandparents for the next six months, and I enrolled in secondgrade—for the second time—at a local Catholic school called Annunciation. 

I wasthe only eight-year-old in second grade, but none of the other kids knew I wasrepeating a year, and there was no doubt that I needed it. 

I could barely read, but Iwas lucky enough to have Sister Katherine as my teacher. 

Short and petite, SisterKatherine was sixty years old and had one gold front tooth. 

She was a nun butdidn’t wear the habit. 

She was also grumpy as hell and took no shit, and I loved herthug ass. 

  Second grade in BrazilAnnunciation was a small school. 

Sister Katherine taught all of first and secondgrade in a single classroom, and with only eighteen kids to teach, she wasn’t willingto shirk her responsibility and blame my academic struggles, or anybody’s badbehavior, on learning disabilities or emotional problems. 

She didn’t know mybackstory and didn’t have to. 

All that mattered to her was that I turned up at herdoor with a kindergarten education, and it was her job to shape my mind. 

She hadevery excuse in the world to farm me out to some specialist or label me a problem,but that wasn’t her style. 

She started teaching before labeling kids was a normalthing to do, and she embodied the no-excuses mentality that I needed if I was goingto catch up. 

 Sister Katherine is the reason why I’ll never trust a smile or judge a scowl. 

My dadsmiled a hell of a lot, and he didn’t give two shits about me, but grouchy SisterKatherine cared about us, cared about me. 

She wanted us to be our very best. 

Iknow this because she proved it by spending extra time with me, as much time as ittook, until I retained my lessons. 

Before the year was out, I could read at a secondgrade level. 

Trunnis Jr. 

hadn’t adjusted nearly as well. 

Within a few months he wasback in Buffalo, shadowing my father and working that Skateland detail like he’dnever left. 

By then, we’d moved into a place of our own: a 600-square-foot, two-bedroomapartment at Lamplight Manor, a public housing block, that cost us $7 a month. 

Myfather, who earned thousands every night, sporadically sent $25 every three or fourweeks (if that) for child support, while my mother earned a few hundred dollars amonth with her department store job. 

In her off-hours she was taking courses atIndiana State University, which cost money too. 

The point is, we had gaps to fill, somy mother enrolled in welfare and received $123 a month and food stamps. 

Theywrote her a check for the first month, but when they found out she owned a car theydisqualified her, explaining that if she sold her car they’d be happy to help. 

The problem is we lived in a rural town with a population of about 8,000 that didn’thave a mass transit system. 

We needed that car so I could get to school, and so shecould get to work and take night classes. 

She was hell-bent on changing her lifecircumstances and found a workaround through the Aide to Dependent Childrenprogram. 

She arranged for our check to go to my grandmother who signed it over toher, but that didn’t make life easy. 

How far can $123 really go?I vividly recall one night we were so broke we drove home on a gas tank that wasnear empty, to a bare refrigerator and a past due electric bill, with no money in thebank. 

Then I remembered that we had two mason jars filled with pennies and otherloose change. 

I grabbed them off the shelf. 

“Mom, let’s count our change!”She smiled. 

Growing up, her father had taught her to pick up the change she foundon the street. 

He was molded by the Great Depression and knew what it was like tobe down and out. 

“You never know when you might need it,” he’d say. 

When welived in Hell, carrying home thousands of dollars every night, the notion that wewould ever run out of money sounded ludicrous, but my mother retained herchildhood habit. 

Trunnis used to belittle her for it, but now it was time to see howfar found money could take us. 

We dumped that change out on the living room floor and counted out enough tocover the electric bill, fill the gas tank, and buy groceries. 

We even had enough tobuy burgers at Hardee’s on the way home. 

These were dark times, but we weremanaging. 

Barely. 

My mother missed Trunnis Jr. 

terribly, but she was pleased that Iwas adjusting and making friends. 

I’d had a good year at school, and from our firstnight in Indiana I hadn’t wet the bed once. 

It seemed that I was healing, but mydemons weren’t gone. 

They were dormant. 

And when they came back, they hithard. 

*** Third grade was a shock to my system. 

Not just because we had to learn cursivewhen I was still getting the hang of reading block letters, but because our teacher,Ms. 

D, was nothing like Sister Katherine. 

Our class was still small, we had abouttwenty kids total, split between third and fourth grade, but she didn’t handle itnearly as well and wasn’t interested in taking the extra time I required. 

My trouble started with the standardized test we took during our first couple ofweeks of class. 

Mine came back a mess. 

I was still way behind the other kids and Ihad trouble building on lessons from the previous days, let alone the previousacademic year. 

Sister Katherine considered similar signs as cues to dedicate moretime with her weakest student, and she challenged me daily. 

Ms. 

D looked for a wayout. 

Within the first month of class, she told my mother that I belonged in adifferent school. 

One for “special students. 

”Every kid knows what “special” means. 

It means you are about to be stigmatizedfor the rest of your damn life. 

It means that you are not normal. 

The threat alonewas a trigger, and I developed a stutter almost overnight. 

My thought-to-speechflow was jammed up with stress and anxiety, and it was at its worst in school. 

Imagine being the only black kid in class, in the entire school, and enduring thedaily humiliation of also being the dumbest. 

I felt like everything I tried to do or saywas wrong, and it got so bad that instead of responding and skipping like scratchedvinyl whenever the teacher called my name, I often chose to keep quiet. 

It was allabout limiting exposure to save face. 

Ms. 

D didn’t even attempt to empathize. 

She went straight to frustration and ventedit by yelling at me, sometimes when she was leaning down, her hand on the back ofmy chair, her face just inches from my own. 

She had no idea the Pandora’s box shewas tearing open. 

Once, school was a safe harbor, the one place I knew I couldn’tbe hurt, but in Indiana it morphed into my torture chamber. 

Ms. 

D wanted me out of her classroom, and the administration supported her untilmy mother fought for me. 

The principal agreed to keep me enrolled if my mothersigned off on time with a speech therapist and put me into group therapy with alocal shrink they recommended. 

The psychologist’s office was adjacent to a hospital, which was exactly whereyou’d want to put it if you were trying to make a little kid doubt himself. 

It was likea bad movie. 

The shrink set up seven chairs in a semicircle around him, but some ofthe kids wouldn’t or couldn’t sit still. 

One child wore a helmet and banged his headagainst the wall repeatedly. 

Another kid stood up while the doctor was mid-sentence, walked toward a far corner of the room, and pissed in the trash can. 

Thekid sitting next to me was the most normal person in the group, and he had set hisown house on fire! I can remember staring up at the shrink on my first day,thinking, There’s no way I belong here. 

That experience kicked my social anxiety up several notches. 

My stutter was out ofcontrol. 

My hair started falling out, and white splotches bloomed on my dark skin. 

The doctor diagnosed me as an ADHD case and prescribed Ritalin, but myproblems were more complex. 

I was suffering from toxic stress. 

 The type of physical and emotional abuse I was exposed to has been proven to havea range of side effects on young children because in our early years the brain growsand develops so rapidly. 

If, during those years, your father is an evil motherfuckerhell-bent on destroying everyone in his house, stress spikes, and when those spikesoccur frequently enough, you can draw a line across the peaks. 

That’s your newbaseline. 

It puts kids in a permanent “fight or flight” mode. 

Fight or flight can be agreat tool when you’re in danger because it amps you up to battle through or sprintfrom trouble, but it’s no way to live. 

I’m not the type of guy to try to explain everything with science, but facts are facts. 

I’ve read that some pediatricians believe toxic stress does more damage to kids thanpolio or meningitis. 

I know firsthand that it leads to learning disabilities and socialanxiety because according to doctors it limits language development and memory,which makes it difficult for even the most gifted student to recall what they havealready learned. 

Looking at the long game, when kids like me grow up, they face anincreased risk for clinical depression, heart disease, obesity, and cancer, not tomention smoking, alcoholism, and drug abuse. 

Those raised in abusive householdshave an increased probability of being arrested as a juvenile by 53 percent. 

Theirodds of committing a violent crime as an adult are increased by 38 percent. 

I wasthe poster child of that generic term we’ve all heard before: “at-risk youth. 

” Mymother wasn’t the one raising a thug. 

Look at the numbers and it’s clear: if anyoneput me on a destructive path it was Trunnis Goggins. 

I didn’t stay in group therapy for long, and I didn’t take Ritalin either. 

My mompicked me up after my second session and I sat in the front seat of her car wearing athousand-yard stare. 

“Mom, I’m not going back,” I said. 

“These boys are crazy. 

”She agreed. 

But I was still a damaged kid, and while there are proven interventions on the bestway to teach and manage kids who suffer from toxic stress, it’s fair to say that Ms. 

D didn’t get those memos. 

I can’t blame her for her own ignorance. 

The sciencewasn’t nearly as clear in the 1980s as it is now. 

All I know is, Sister Katherine toiledin the trenches with the same malformed kid that Ms. 

D dealt with, but shemaintained high expectations and didn’t let her frustration overwhelm her. 

She hadthe mindset of, Look, everybody learns in a different way and we’re gonna figureout how you learn. 

She deduced that I needed repetition. 

That I needed to solve thesame problems over and over again in a different way to learn, and she knew thattook time. 

Ms. 

D was all about productivity. 

She was saying, Keep up or get out. 

Meanwhile, I felt backed into a corner. 

I knew that if I didn’t show someimprovement I would eventually be shipped out to that special black hole for good,so I found a solution. 

I started cheating my ass off. 

Studying was hard, especially with my fucked-up brain, but I was a damn goodcheat. 

I copied friends’ homework and scanned my neighbors’ work during tests. 

Ieven copied the answers on the standardized tests that didn’t have any impact on mygrades. 

It worked! My rising test scores placated Ms. 

D, and my mother stoppedgetting calls from school. 

I thought I’d solved a problem when really I was creatingnew ones by taking the path of least resistance. 

My coping mechanism confirmedthat I would never learn squat at school, and that I would never catch up, whichpushed me closer toward a flunked out fate. 

 The saving grace of those early years in Brazil was that I was way too young tounderstand the kind of prejudice I would soon face in my new hick hometown. 

Whenever you’re the only one of your kind, you’re in danger of being pushedtoward the margins, suspected and disregarded, bullied and mistreated by ignorantpeople. 

That’s just the way life is, especially back then, and by the time that realitykicked me in the throat, my life had already become a full-fledged, fuck-you fortunecookie. 

Whenever I cracked it open, I got the same message. 

You were born to fail!    OceanofPDF. 

com  CHALLENGE #1My bad cards arrived early and stuck around a while, but everyone gets challengedin life at some point. 

What was your bad hand? What kind of bullshit did youcontend with growing up? Were you beaten? Abused? Bullied? Did you ever feelinsecure? Maybe your limiting factor is that you grew up so supported andcomfortable, you never pushed yourself?What are the current factors limiting your growth and success? Is someone standingin your way at work or school? Are you underappreciated and overlooked foropportunities? What are the long odds you’re up against right now? Are youstanding in your own way?Break out your journal—if you don’t have one, buy one, or start one on your laptop,tablet, or in the notes app on your smart phone—and write them all out in minutedetail. 

Don’t be bland with this assignment. 

I showed you every piece of my dirtylaundry. 

If you were hurt or are still in harm’s way, tell the story in full. 

Give yourpain shape. 

Absorb its power, because you are about to flip that shit. 

You will use your story, this list of excuses, these very good reasons why youshouldn’t amount to a damn thing, to fuel your ultimate success. 

Sounds fun right?Yeah, it won’t be. 

But don’t worry about that yet. 

We’ll get there. 

For now, just takeinventory. 

Once you have your list, share it with whoever you want. 

For some, it may meanlogging onto social media, posting a picture, and writing out a few lines about howyour own past or present circumstances challenge you to the depth of your soul. 

Ifthat’s you, use the hashtags #badhand #canthurtme. 

Otherwise, acknowledge andaccept it privately. 

Whatever works for you. 

I know it’s hard, but this act alone willbegin to empower you to overcome. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com   CHAPTER TWO     2. 

TRUTH HURTSWilmoth Irving was a new beginning. 

Up until he met my mother and asked for herphone number, all I’d known was misery and struggle. 

When the money was good,our lives were defined by trauma. 

Once we were free of my father, we were sweptunder by our own PTSD-level dysfunction and poverty. 

Then, when I was in fourthgrade, she met Wilmoth, a successful carpenter and general contractor fromIndianapolis. 

She was attracted to his easy smile and laid-back style. 

There was noviolence in him. 

He gave us permission to exhale. 

With him around it felt like wehad some support, like something good was finally happening to us. 

      With WilmothShe laughed when they were together. 

Her smile was bright and real. 

She stood up alittle straighter. 

He gave her pride and made her feel beautiful again. 

As for me,Wilmoth became as close to a healthy father figure as I’ve ever had. 

He didn’tcoddle me. 

He didn’t tell me he loved me or any of that fake-ass sappy shit, but hewas there. 

Basketball had been an obsession of mine since grade school. 

It was thecore of my relationship with my best friend, Johnny Nichols, and Wilmoth hadgame. 

He and I hit the courts together all the time. 

He showed me moves, tuned upmy defensive discipline, and helped me develop a jump shot. 

The three of uscelebrated birthdays and holidays together, and the summer before eighth grade, hegot down on one knee and asked my mother to make it official. 

Wilmoth lived in Indianapolis, and our plan was to move in with him the followingsummer. 

Though he wasn’t nearly as rich as Trunnis, he made a nice living and welooked forward to city life again. 

Then in 1989, the day after Christmas, everything stopped. 

We hadn’t made the full time move to Indy yet, and he’d spent Christmas Day withus at my grandparents’ place in Brazil. 

The next day, he had a basketball game inhis men’s league and he’d invited me to sub for one of his teammates. 

I was soexcited I’d packed my bags two days early, but that morning he told me I couldn’tcome after all. 

“I’m gonna keep you back here this time, Little David,” he said. 

I dropped my headand sighed. 

He could tell I was upset and tried to reassure me. 

“Your mom is gonnadrive up in a few days and we can play ball then. 

”I nodded, reluctantly, but I wasn’t raised to pry into the affairs of adults and knew Iwasn’t owed an explanation or make-up game. 

My mother and I watched from thefront porch as he backed out of the carport, smiled, and gave us that crisp singlewave of his. 

Then he drove off. 

It was the last time we’d ever see him alive. 

He played in his men’s league game that night, as planned, and drove home alone tothe “house with the white lions. 

” Whenever he gave directions to friends, family, ordelivery guys, that’s how he always described his ranch-style house, its drivewayframed by two white lion sculptures elevated on pillars. 

He pulled between themand into the garage where he could enter the house directly, oblivious to the dangermoving in from behind. 

He never did close that garage door. 

They’d been staking him out for hours, waiting for a window, and as he climbed outfrom the driver’s side door, they stepped from the shadows and fired from closerange. 

He was shot five times in the chest. 

When he dropped to the floor of hisgarage, the gunman stepped over him and delivered a kill shot right between hiseyes. 

Wilmoth’s father lived a few blocks away, and when he drove by the white lions thenext morning, he noticed his son’s garage door open and knew something waswrong. 

He walked up the driveway and into the garage where he sobbed over hisdead son. 

Wilmoth was just forty-three years old. 

I was still at my grandmother’s house when Wilmoth’s mother called moments later. 

She hung up and motioned me to her side to break the news. 

I thought about mymom. 

Wilmoth had been her savior. 

She’d been coming out of her shell, openingup, ready to believe in good things. 

What would this do to her? Would God evergive her a damn break? It started as a simmer but within seconds my rageoverwhelmed me. 

I broke free of my grandmother, punched the refrigerator, and lefta dent. 

We drove to our place to find my mother, who was already frantic because shehadn’t heard from Wilmoth. 

She called his house just before we arrived, and when adetective picked up the phone it puzzled her, but she didn’t expect this. 

How couldshe? We saw her confusion as my grandmother walked over, peeled the phone fromher fingers, and sat her down. 

 She didn’t believe us at first. 

Wilmoth was a prankster and this was just the kind offucked-up stunt he might try to pull off. 

Then she remembered he’d been shot twomonths before. 

He’d told her the guys who’d done that weren’t after him. 

Thatthose bullets were meant for someone else, and because they merely grazed him,she decided to forget about the whole thing. 

Until that moment, she never suspectedthat Wilmoth had some secret street life she knew nothing about, and the policenever did find out exactly why he was shot and killed. 

The speculation was that hewas involved in a shady business deal or a drug deal gone bad. 

My mother was stillin denial when she packed a bag, but she included a dress for his funeral. 

When we arrived, his house was wrapped in a ribbon of yellow police tape like afucked-up Christmas gift. 

This was no prank. 

My mom parked, ducked under thetape, and I followed right behind her to the front door. 

On the way, I rememberglancing to my left trying to get a glimpse of the scene where Wilmoth had beenkilled. 

His cold blood was still pooled on the garage floor. 

I was a fourteen-year-oldwandering through an active crime scene, but nobody, not my mother, notWilmoth’s family, and not even the police seemed disturbed by me being there,absorbing the heavy vibe of my would-be stepfather’s murder. 

As fucked up as it sounds, the police allowed my mom to stay in Wilmoth’s housethat night. 

Rather than stay alone, she had her brother-in-law there, armed with histwo guns in case the killers came back. 

I wound up in a back bedroom at Wilmoth’ssister’s place, a dark and spooky house a few miles away, and left alone all night. 

The house was furnished with one of those analog, cabinet television sets withthirteen channels on a dial. 

Only three channels came in static-free, and I kept it onthe local news. 

They ran the same tape on a loop every thirty minutes: footage ofmy mom and me ducking under police tape then watching Wilmoth get wheeled ona gurney toward a waiting ambulance, a sheet over his body. 

It was like a horror scene. 

I sat there all alone, watching the same footage over andover. 

My mind was a broken record that kept skipping into darkness. 

The past hadbeen bleak and now our sky-blue future had been blown the fuck up too. 

Therewould be no reprieve, only my familiar fucked-up reality choking out all light. 

Eachtime I watched, my fear grew until it filled the room, and still I could not stop. 

A few days after we buried Wilmoth, and just after the new year, I boarded a schoolbus in Brazil, Indiana. 

I was still grieving, and my head was spinning because mymother and I hadn’t decided whether or not we were staying in Brazil or moving toIndianapolis as planned. 

We were in limbo and she remained in a state of shock. 

She still hadn’t cried over Wilmoth’s death. 

Instead she became emotionally vacantagain. 

It was as if all the pain she’d experienced in her life resurfaced as one gapingwound she disappeared into, and there was no reaching her in that void. 

In themeantime, school was starting up, so I played along, looking for any shred ofnormal I could hang onto. 

But it was hard. 

I rode a bus to school most days, and my first day back, I couldn’tshake a memory I’d buried from the year before. 

That morning, I slid into a seatabove the back left tire overlooking the street as usual. 

When we arrived at schoolthe bus pulled up to the curb, we needed to wait for the ones ahead of us to movebefore we could get off. 

In the meantime, a car pulled alongside us, and a cute,overeager little boy ran toward our bus carrying a platter of cookies. 

The driverdidn’t see him. 

The bus jerked forward. 

 I noticed the alarmed look on his mother’s face before the sudden crush of bloodsplattered my window. 

His mother howled in horror. 

She wasn’t among us anymore. 

She looked and sounded like a fierce, wounded animal as she literally pulled thehair from her head by the roots. 

Soon sirens wailed in the distance and screamedcloser by the second. 

The little boy was about six years old. 

The cookies were apresent for the driver. 

We were all ordered off the bus, and as I walked by the tragedy, for some reason—call it human curiosity, call it the magnetic pull of dark to dark—I peeked under thebus and saw him. 

His head was nearly as flat as paper, his brains and blood mingledunder the carriage like spent oil. 

For a full year I hadn’t thought of that image even once, but Wilmoth’s deathreawakened it, and now it was all I could think about. 

I was beyond the pale. 

Nothing mattered to me. 

I’d seen enough to know that the world was filled withhuman tragedy and that it would just keep piling up in drifts until it swallowed me. 

I couldn’t sleep in bed anymore. 

Neither could my mother. 

She slept in her armchair with the television on blast or with a book in her hands. 

For a little while, Itried to curl up in bed at night but would always wake in the fetal position on thefloor. 

Eventually I gave in and bedded down low to the ground. 

Maybe because Iknew if I could find comfort at the bottom place there would be no more falling. 

We were two people in dire need of the fresh start we thought we had coming, soeven without Wilmoth, we made the move to Indianapolis. 

My mother set me up forentry exams at Cathedral High School, a private college preparatory academy in theheart of the city. 

As usual, I cheated, and off a smart motherfucker too. 

When myacceptance letter and class schedule came in the mail the summer before freshmanyear, I was looking at a full slate of AP classes!I hacked my way through, cheating and copying, and managed to make thefreshman basketball team, which was one of the best freshman teams in the entirestate. 

We had several future college players, and I started at point guard. 

That was aconfidence boost, but not the kind I could build on because I knew I was anacademic fraud. 

Plus, the school cost my mom way too much money, so after onlyone year at Cathedral, she pulled the plug. 

I started my sophomore year at North Central High School, a public school with4,000 kids in a majority black neighborhood, and on my first day I turned up likesome preppy-ass white boy. 

My jeans were definitely too tight, and my collaredshirt was tucked into a waistline cinched with a braided belt. 

The only reason Ididn’t get completely laughed out of the building was because I could ball. 

My sophomore year was all about being cool. 

I switched up my wardrobe, whichwas increasingly influenced by hip hop culture, and hung out with gang bangers andother borderline delinquents, which meant I didn’t always go to school. 

One day,my mom came home in the middle of the day and found me sitting around ourdining room table with what she described as “ten thugs. 

” She wasn’t wrong. 

Within a few weeks she packed us up and moved us back to Brazil, Indiana. 

I enrolled at Northview High School the week of basketball tryouts, and I remembershowing up at lunch time when the cafeteria was full. 

There were 1,200 kids enrolled at Northview, only five of which were black, and the last time any of themhad seen me I looked a lot like them. 

Not anymore. 

I strolled into school that day wearing pants five sizes too big and sagged way downlow. 

I also wore an oversized Chicago Bulls Jacket with a backward hat, cocked tothe side. 

Within seconds, all eyes were upon me. 

Teachers, students, andadministrative staff stared at me like I was some exotic species. 

I was the firstthuggish black kid many of them had seen in real life. 

My mere presence hadstopped the music. 

I was the needle being dragged across vinyl, scratching a wholenew rhythm, and like hip hop itself, everybody noticed but not everyone liked whatthey heard. 

I strutted through the scene like I gave no fucks. 

But that was a lie. 

I acted all kinds of cocky and my entrance was brash as hell, butI felt very insecure going back there. 

Buffalo had been like living in a blazinginferno. 

My early years in Brazil were a perfect incubator for post traumatic stress,and before I left I was delivered a double dose of death trauma. 

Moving toIndianapolis had been an opportunity to escape pity and leave all that behind. 

Classwasn’t easy for me, but I’d made friends and developed a new style. 

Now, comingback, I looked different enough on the outside to perpetuate an illusion that I’dchanged, but in order to change you have to work through shit. 

Confront it and getreal. 

I hadn’t done a shred of that hard work. 

I was still a dumb kid with nothingsolid to lean on, and basketball tryouts ripped away any confidence I had left. 

When I got to the gym, they made me suit-up in uniform rather than wear my moregeneric gym clothes. 

Back then the style was getting baggy and oversized, whichChris Webber and Jalen Rose of the Fab Five would make famous at the Universityof Michigan. 

The coaches in Brazil didn’t have their fingers on that pulse. 

They putme in the tighty-whitey version of basketball shorts, which strangled my balls,hugged my thighs super tight, and felt all kinds of wrong. 

I was trapped in thecoaches’ preferred dream state: a Larry Bird time warp. 

Which made sense becauseLarry Legend was basically a patron saint in Brazil and all of Indiana. 

In fact, hisdaughter went to our school. 

We were friends. 

But that didn’t mean I wanted todress like him!Then there was my etiquette. 

In Indianapolis the coaches let us talk shit on thecourt. 

If I made a good move or hit a shot in your face, I talked about your mama oryour girlfriend. 

In Indy, I’d done research on my shit talking. 

I got good at it. 

I wasthe Draymond Green of my school, and it was all part of basketball culture in thecity. 

Back in farm country, that cost me. 

When tryouts started, I handled the rock abunch, and when I crossed some of the kids over and made them look bad I let themand the coaches know. 

My attitude embarrassed the coaches (who were apparentlyignorant that their hero, Larry Legend, was an all-time great trash talker), and itwasn’t long before they took the ball out of my hands and put me in the front court,a position I’d never played before. 

I was uncomfortable down low, and played likeit. 

That shut me up good. 

Meanwhile, Johnny was dominating. 

My only saving grace that week was getting back with Johnny Nichols. 

We’d stayedclose while I was away and our marathon one-on-one battles were back on fullswing. 

Though he was undersized, he was always a nice player and he was one ofthe best on the floor during tryouts. 

He was draining shots, seeing the open man,and running the court. 

It was no surprise when he made the varsity squad, but wewere both shocked that I barely made JV. 

 I was crushed. 

And not because of basketball tryouts. 

To me that outcome wasanother symptom of something else I’d been feeling. 

Brazil looked the same, butshit felt different this time around. 

Grade school had been hard academically, buteven though we were one of only a few black families in town, I didn’t notice orfeel any palpable racism. 

As a teenager I experienced it everywhere, and it wasn’tbecause I’d become ultra sensitive. 

Outright racism had always been there. 

Not long after moving back to Brazil, my cousin Damien and I went to a party wayout in the country. 

We stayed out well past curfew. 

In fact, we were up all nightlong, and after daybreak we called our grandmother for a ride home. 

“Excuse me?” She asked. 

“You disobeyed me, so you may as well start walking. 

”Roger that. 

She lived ten miles away, down a long country road, but we joked around andenjoyed ourselves as we started to stroll. 

Damien lived in Indianapolis and we wereboth sagging our baggy jeans and dressed in oversized Starter jackets, not exactlytypical gear on Brazil’s country roads. 

We’d walked seven miles in a few hourswhen a pick-up truck came bouncing down the tarmac in our direction. 

We edged tothe side of the road to let it pass, but it slowed down, and as it crept past us, wecould see two teenagers in the cab and a third standing in the bed of the truck. 

Thepassenger pointed and yelled through his open window. 

“Niggers!”We didn’t overreact. 

We put our heads down and kept walking at the same pace,until we heard that beat-to-shit truck squeal to a stop on a patch of gravel, and kickup a dust storm. 

That’s when I turned and saw the passenger, a scruffy lookingredneck, exit the cab of the truck with a pistol in his hand. 

He aimed it at my headas he stalked toward me. 

“Where the fuck you from, and why the fuck you here in this fucking town?!”Damien eased down the road, while I locked eyes with the gunman and saidnothing. 

He stepped within two feet of me. 

The threat of violence doesn’t get muchmore real than that. 

Chills rippled my skin, but I refused to run or cower. 

After afew seconds he got back in the truck and they sped off. 

It wasn’t the first time I’d heard the word. 

Not long before that I was hanging out inPizza Hut with Johnny and a couple of girls, including a brunette I liked, namedPam. 

She liked me too, but we’d never acted on it. 

We were two innocents enjoyingone another’s company, but when her father arrived to take her home he caughtsight of us, and when Pam saw him, her face went ghost white. 

He burst into the packed restaurant and stalked toward us with all eyes on him. 

Henever addressed me. 

He just locked eyes with her and said, “I don’t want to ever seeyou sitting with this nigger again. 

”She hustled out the door after him, her face red with shame as I sat, paralyzed,staring at the floor. 

It was the most humiliating moment of my life, and it hurt muchmore than the gun incident because it happened in public, and the word had been spewed by a grown-ass man. 

I couldn’t understand how or why he was filled withso much hate, and if he felt that way, how many other people in Brazil shared hispoint of view when they saw me walking down the street? It was the sort of riddleyou didn’t want to solve. 

***They won’t call on me if they can’t see me. 

That was how I operated during mysophomore year in high school in Brazil, Indiana. 

I would hide out in the back rows,slump low in my chair, and sidestep my way through each and every class. 

Our highschool made us take a foreign language that year, which was funny to me. 

Notbecause I couldn’t see the value, but because I could barely read English, let aloneunderstand Spanish. 

By then, after a good eight years of cheating, my ignorance hadcrystalized. 

I kept leveling up in school, on track, but hadn’t learned a damn thing. 

Iwas one of those kids who thought he was gaming the system when, the whole time,I’d been gaming myself. 

One morning, about halfway through the school year, I milled into Spanish classand grabbed my workbook from a back cupboard. 

There was technique involved inskating by. 

You didn’t have to pay attention, but you did have to make it seem likeyou were, so I slumped into my seat, opened up my workbook, and fixed my gazeon the teacher who lectured from the front of the room. 

When I looked down at the page the whole room went silent. 

At least to me. 

Herlips were still moving, but I couldn’t hear because my attention had narrowed on themessage left for me, and me alone. 

We each had our own assigned workbook in that class, and my name was written inpencil at the top right corner of the title page. 

That’s how they knew it was mine. 

Below that, someone had drawn an image of me in a noose. 

It looked rudimentary,like something out of the hangman game we used to play as kids. 

Below that werethe words. 

Niger we’re gonna kill you!They’d misspelled it, but I had no clue. 

I could barely spell myself, and they’dmade their fucking point. 

I looked around the room as my rage gathered like atyphoon until it was literally buzzing in my ears. 

I’m not supposed to be here, Ithought to myself. 

I’m not supposed to be back in Brazil!I took inventory of all the incidents I’d already experienced and decided I couldn’ttake much more. 

The teacher was still talking when I rose up without warning. 

Shecalled my name but I wasn’t trying to hear. 

I left the classroom, notebook in hand,and bolted to the principal’s office. 

I was so enraged I didn’t even stop at the frontdesk. 

I walked right into his office and dropped the evidence on his desk. 

“I’m tired of this shit,” I said. 

Kirk Freeman was the principal at that time, and to this day he still rememberslooking up from his desk and seeing tears in my eyes. 

It wasn’t some mystery whyall this shit was happening in Brazil. 

Southern Indiana had always been a hotbed ofracists, and he knew it. 

Four years later, in 1995, the Ku Klux Klan would march down Brazil’s main drag on Independence Day, in full hooded regalia. 

The KKKwas active in Center Point, a town located not fifteen minutes away, and kids fromthere went to our school. 

Some of them sat behind me in history class and told racistjokes for my benefit nearly every damn day. 

I wasn’t expecting some investigationinto who did it. 

More than anything, in that moment, I was looking for somecompassion, and I could tell from the look in Principal Freeman’s eyes he felt badabout what I was going through, but he was at a loss. 

He didn’t know how to helpme. 

Instead, he examined the drawing and the message for a long beat, then raisedhis eyes to mine, ready to console me with his words of wisdom. 

“David, this is sheer ignorance,” he said. 

“They don’t even know how to spellnigger. 

”My life had been threatened, and that was the best he could do. 

The loneliness I feltleaving his office is something I’ll never forget. 

It was scary to think that there wasso much hate flowing through the halls and that someone I didn’t even knowwanted me dead because of the color of my skin. 

The same question kept loopingthrough my mind: Who the fuck is out here who hates me like this? I had no ideawho my enemy was. 

Was it one of the rednecks from history class, or was itsomebody I thought I was cool with but who really didn’t like me at all? It was onething staring down the barrel of a gun on the street or dealing with some racistparent. 

At least that shit was honest. 

Wondering who else felt that way in my schoolwas a different kind of unnerving, and I couldn’t shake it off. 

Even though I hadplenty of friends, all of them white, I couldn’t stop seeing the hidden racismscrawled all over the walls in invisible ink, which made it extremely hard to carrythe weight of being the only. 

     KKK in Center Point in 1995—Center Point is fifteen minutes from my house in BrazilMost, if not all, minorities, women, and gay people in America know that strain ofloneliness well. 

Of walking into rooms where you are the only one of your kind. 

Most white men have no idea how hard it can be. 

I wish they did. 

Because thenthey’d know how it drains you. 

How some days, all you want to do is stay homeand wallow because to go public is to be completely exposed, vulnerable to a worldthat tracks and judges you. 

At least that’s how it feels. 

The truth is, you can’t tell forsure when or if that is actually happening in a given moment. 

But it often feels likeit, which is its own kind of mindfuck. 

In Brazil, I was the only everywhere I went. 

At my table in the cafeteria, where I chilled at lunch with Johnny and our crew. 

Inevery class I took. 

Even in the damn basketball gym. 

By the end of that year I turned sixteen and my grandfather bought me a used, doo-doo brown Chevy Citation. 

One of the first mornings I ever drove it to school,someone spray painted the word “nigger” on my driver’s side door. 

This time theyspelled it correctly and Principal Freeman was again at a loss for words. 

The furythat churned within me that day was indescribable, but it didn’t radiate out. 

It brokeme down from within because I hadn’t yet learned what to do or where to channelthat much emotion. 

Was I supposed to fight everybody? I’d been suspended from school three times forfighting, and by now I was almost numb. 

Instead, I withdrew and fell into the wellof black nationalism. 

Malcolm X became my prophet of choice. 

I used to come home from school and watch the same video of one of his early speeches everydamn day. 

I was trying to find comfort somewhere, and the way he analyzed historyand spun black hopelessness into rage nourished me, though most of his politicaland economic philosophies went over my head. 

It was his anger at a system madeby and for white people that I connected with because I lived in a haze of hate,trapped in my own fruitless rage and ignorance. 

But I wasn’t Nation of Islammaterial. 

That shit took discipline, and I had none of that. 

Instead, by my junior year, I went out of my way to piss people off by becoming theexact stereotype racist white people loathed and feared. 

I wore my pants downbelow my ass every day. 

I ghetto wired my car stereo to house speakers which filledthe trunk of my Citation. 

I rattled windows when I cruised down Brazil’s main dragblasting Snoop’s Gin and Juice. 

I put three of those shag carpet covers over mysteering wheel and dangled a pair of fuzzy dice from the rearview. 

Every morningbefore school I stared into our bathroom mirror and came up with new ways to fuckwith the racists at my school. 

I even concocted wild hairdos. 

Once, I gave myself a reverse part—shaving awayall my hair save a thin radial line on the left side of my scalp. 

It wasn’t that I wasunpopular. 

I was considered the cool black kid in town, but if you’d have botheredto drill down a little deeper, you’d see that I wasn’t about black culture and that myantics weren’t really trying to call out racism. 

I wasn’t about anything at all. 

Everything I did was to get a reaction out of the people who hated me most becauseeveryone’s opinion of me mattered to me, and that’s a shallow way to live. 

I wasfull of pain, had no real purpose, and if you were watching from afar it would havelooked like I’d given up on any chance of success. 

That I was heading for disaster. 

But I hadn’t let go of all hope. 

I had one more dream left. 

I wanted to join the Air Force. 

My grandfather had been a cook in the Air Force for thirty-seven years, and he wasso proud of his service that even after he retired he’d wear his dress uniform tochurch on Sundays, and his work-a-day uniform midweek just to sit on the damnporch. 

That level of pride inspired me to join the Civil Air Patrol, the civilianauxiliary of the Air Force. 

We met once a week, marched in formation, and learnedabout the various jobs available in the Air Force from officers, which is how Ibecame fascinated with Pararescue—the guys who jump out of airplanes to pulldowned pilots out of harm’s way. 

I attended a week-long course during the summer before my freshman year calledPJOC, the Pararescue Jump Orientation Course. 

As usual, I was the only. 

One day apararescuman named Scott Gearen came to speak, and he had a motherfucker of astory to tell. 

During a standard exercise, on a high altitude jump from 13,000 feet,Gearen deployed his chute with another skydiver right above him. 

That wasn’t outof the ordinary. 

He had the right of way, and per his training, he’d waved off theother jumper. 

Except the guy didn’t see him, which placed Gearen in grave dangerbecause the jumper above him was still mid free-fall, hurtling through the air atover 120 mph. 

He went into a cannonball hoping to avoid clipping Gearen, but itdidn’t work. 

Gearen had no clue what was coming when his teammate flew throughhis canopy, collapsing it on contact, and slammed into Gearen’s face with his knees. 

Gearen was knocked unconscious instantly and wobbled into another free fall, his crushed chute creating very little drag. 

The other skydiver was able to deploy hischute and survive with minor injuries. 

Gearen didn’t really land. 

He bounced like a flat basketball, three times, but becausehe’d been unconscious, his body was limp, and he didn’t come apart despitecrashing into the ground at 100 mph. 

He died twice on the operating table, but theER docs brought him back to life. 

When he woke in a hospital bed, they said hewouldn’t make a full recovery and would never be a pararescuman again. 

Eighteenmonths later he’d defied medical odds, made that full recovery, and was back on thejob he loved. 

    Scott Gearen after his accidentFor years I was obsessed with that story because he’d survived the impossible, and Iresonated with his survival. 

After Wilmoth’s murder, with all those racist tauntsraining down on my head (I won’t bore you with every single episode, just know there were many more), I felt like I was free falling with no fucking chute. 

Gearenwas living proof that it’s possible to transcend anything that doesn’t kill you, andfrom the time I heard him speak I knew I would enlist in the Air Force aftergraduation, which only made school seem more irrelevant. 

Especially after I was cut from the varsity basketball team during my junior year. 

Iwasn’t cut because of my skills. 

The coaches knew I was one of the best playersthey had, and that I loved the game. 

Johnny and I played it night and day. 

Our entirefriendship was based on basketball, but because I was angry at the coaches for howthey used me on the JV team the year before, I didn’t attend summer workouts, andthey took that as a lack of commitment to the team. 

They didn’t know or care thatwhen they cut me, they’d eliminated any incentive I’d had to keep my GPA up,which I’d barely managed to do through cheating anyway. 

Now, I had no goodreason to attend school. 

At least that’s what I thought, because I was clueless aboutthe emphasis that the military places on education. 

I figured they’d take anybody. 

Two incidents convinced me otherwise and inspired me to change. 

The first was when I failed the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery test(ASVAB) during my junior year. 

The ASVAB is the armed forces version of theSATs. 

It’s a standardized test that allows the military to assess your currentknowledge and future potential for learning at the same time, and I showed up forthat test prepared to do what I did best: cheat. 

I’d been copying on every test, inevery class, for years, but when I took my seat for the ASVAB I was shocked to seethat the people seated to my right and left had different tests than I did. 

I had to go italone and scored a 20 out of a possible 99 points. 

The absolute minimum standardto be admitted to the Air Force is only 36, and I couldn’t even get there. 

The second sign that I needed to change arrived with a postmark just before schoollet out for the summer after junior year. 

My mother was still in her emotional blackhole after Wilmoth’s murder, and her coping mechanism was to take on as much aspossible. 

She worked full-time at DePauw University and taught night classes atIndiana State University because if she stopped hustling long enough to think, shewould realize the reality of her life. 

She kept it moving, was never around, andnever asked to see my grades. 

After the first semester of our junior year, I rememberJohnny and me bringing home Fs and Ds. 

We spent two hours doctoring the ink. 

Weturned Fs into Bs and Ds into Cs, and were laughing the whole damn time. 

Iactually remember feeling a perverse pride in being able to show my fake grades tomy mother, but she never even asked to see them. 

She took my damn word for it. 

     Junior year transcriptWe lived parallel lives in the same house, and since I was more or less raisingmyself, I stopped listening to her. 

In fact, about ten days before the letter arrived,she’d kicked me out because I refused to come home from a party before curfew. 

She told me that if I didn’t, I shouldn’t come home at all. 

In my mind, I had already been living by myself for several years. 

I made my ownmeals, cleaned my own clothes. 

I wasn’t angry at her. 

I was cocky and figured Ididn’t need her anymore. 

I stayed out that night, and for the next week and a half Icrashed at Johnny’s place or with other friends. 

Eventually the day came when I’dspent my last dollar. 

By chance, she called me at Johnny’s that morning and told meabout a letter from school. 

It said I’d missed over a quarter of the year due tounexcused absences, that I had a D average, and unless I showed significantimprovement in my GPA and attendance during my senior year, I would notgraduate. 

She wasn’t emotional about it. 

She was more exhausted than exasperated. 

“I’ll come home and get the note,” I said. 

“No need for that,” she replied, “I just wanted you to know you were flunking out. 

”I showed up on her doorstep later that day with my stomach growling. 

I didn’t askfor forgiveness and she didn’t demand an apology. 

She just left the door open andwalked away. 

I stepped into the kitchen and made myself a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. 

She passed me the letter without saying a word. 

I read it in my roomwhere the walls were papered over with layers of Michael Jordan and special opsposters. 

Inspiration for twin passions slipping through my fingers. 

That night, after taking a shower, I wiped the steam away from our corrodedbathroom mirror and took a good look. 

I didn’t like who I saw staring back. 

I was alow-budget thug with no purpose and no future. 

I felt so disgusted I wanted topunch that motherfucker in the face and shatter glass. 

Instead, I lectured him. 

It wastime to get real. 

“Look at you,” I said. 

“Why do you think the Air Force wants your punk ass? Youstand for nothing. 

You are an embarrassment. 

”I reached for the shaving cream, smoothed a thin coat over my face, unwrapped afresh razor and kept talking as I shaved. 

“You are one dumb motherfucker. 

You read like a third grader. 

You’re a fuckingjoke! You’ve never tried hard at anything in your life besides basketball, and youhave goals? That’s fucking hilarious. 

”After shaving peach fuzz from my cheeks and chin, I lathered up my scalp. 

I wasdesperate for a change. 

I wanted to become someone new. 

“You don’t see people in the military sagging their pants. 

You need to stop talkinglike a wanna-be-gangster. 

None of this shit is gonna cut it! No more taking the easyway out! It’s time to grow the fuck up!”Steam billowed all around me. 

It rippled off my skin and poured from my soul. 

What started as a spontaneous venting session had become a solo intervention. 

“It’s on you,” I said. 

“Yeah, I know shit is fucked up. 

I know what you’ve beenthrough. 

I was there, bitch! Merry fucking Christmas. 

Nobody is coming to saveyour ass! Not your mommy, not Wilmoth. 

Nobody! It’s up to you!”By the time I was done talking, I was shaved clean. 

Water pearled on my scalp,streamed from my forehead, and dripped down the bridge of my nose. 

I lookeddifferent, and for the first time, I’d held myself accountable. 

A new ritual was born,one that stayed with me for years. 

It would help me get my grades up, whip mysorry ass into shape, and see me through graduation and into the Air Force. 

The ritual was simple. 

I’d shave my face and scalp every night, get loud, and getreal. 

I set goals, wrote them on Post-It notes, and tagged them to what I now call theAccountability Mirror, because each day I’d hold myself accountable to the goalsI’d set. 

At first my goals involved shaping up my appearance and accomplishing allmy chores without having to be asked. 

Make your bed like you’re in the military every day!Pull up your pants!Shave your head every morning!Cut the grass! Wash all dishes!The Accountability Mirror kept me on point from then on, and though I was stillyoung when this strategy came through me, since then I’ve found it useful forpeople at any stage in life. 

You could be on the cusp of retirement, looking toreinvent yourself. 

Maybe you’re going through a bad break-up or have gainedweight. 

Perhaps you’re permanently disabled, overcoming some other injury, or arejust coming to grips with how much of your life you’ve wasted, living withoutpurpose. 

In each case, that negativity you’re feeling is your internal desire forchange, but change doesn’t come easy, and the reason this ritual worked so well forme was because of my tone. 

I wasn’t fluffy. 

I was raw because that was the only way to get myself right. 

Thatsummer between my junior and senior year in high school I was afraid. 

I wasinsecure. 

I wasn’t a smart kid. 

I’d blown off all accountability for my entire teenageexistence, and actually thought I was getting over on all the adults in my life,getting over on the system. 

I’d duped myself into a negative feedback loop ofcheating and scamming that on the surface looked like advancement until I hit abrick fucking wall called reality. 

That night when I came home and read the letterfrom my school, there was no denying the truth, and I delivered it hard. 

I didn’t dance around and say, “Geez, David, you are not taking your education veryseriously. 

” No, I had to own it in the raw because the only way we can change is tobe real with ourselves. 

If you don’t know shit and have never taken schoolseriously, then say, “I’m dumb!” Tell yourself that you need to get your ass to workbecause you’re falling behind in life!If you look in the mirror and you see a fat person, don’t tell yourself that you needto lose a couple of pounds. 

Tell the truth. 

You’re fucking fat! It’s okay. 

Just sayyou’re fat if you’re fat. 

The dirty mirror that you see every day is going to tell youthe truth every time, so why are you still lying to yourself? So you can feel betterfor a few minutes and stay the fucking same? If you’re fat you need to change thefact that you’re fat because it’s very fucking unhealthy. 

I know because I’ve beenthere. 

If you have worked for thirty years doing the same shit you’ve hated day in and dayout because you were afraid to quit and take a risk, you’ve been living like a pussy. 

Period, point blank. 

Tell yourself the truth! That you’ve wasted enough time, andthat you have other dreams that will take courage to realize, so you don’t die afucking pussy. 

Call yourself out!Nobody likes to hear the hard truth. 

Individually and as a culture, we avoid what weneed to hear most. 

This world is fucked up, there are major problems in our society. 

We are still dividing ourselves up along racial and cultural lines, and people don’thave the balls to hear it! The truth is racism and bigotry still fucking exist and somepeople are so thin-skinned they refuse to admit that. 

To this day, many in Brazilclaim that there is no racism in their small town. 

That’s why I have to give KirkFreeman props. 

When I called him in the spring of 2018, he remembered what Iwent through very clearly. 

He’s one of the few who isn’t afraid of the truth. 

 But if you are the only, and you aren’t stuck in some real-world genocidal twilightzone, you’d better get real too. 

Your life is not fucked up because of overt racists orhidden systemic racism. 

You aren’t missing out on opportunities, making shitmoney, and getting evicted because of America or Donald fucking Trump orbecause your ancestors were slaves or because some people hate immigrants orJews or harass women or believe gay people are going to hell. 

If any of that shit isstopping you from excelling in life, I’ve got some news. 

You are stopping you!You are giving up instead of getting hard! Tell the truth about the real reasons foryour limitations and you will turn that negativity, which is real, into jet fuel. 

Thoseodds stacked against you will become a damn runway!There is no more time to waste. 

Hours and days evaporate like creeks in the desert. 

That’s why it’s okay to be cruel to yourself as long as you realize you’re doing it tobecome better. 

We all need thicker skin to improve in life. 

Being soft when youlook in the mirror isn’t going to inspire the wholesale changes we need to shift ourpresent and open up our future. 

The morning after that first session with the Accountability Mirror, I trashed theshag steering wheel and the fuzzy dice. 

I tucked my shirt in and wore my pants witha belt, and, once school started up again, I stopped eating at my lunch table. 

For thefirst time, being liked and acting cool were a waste of my time, and instead ofeating with all the popular kids, I found my own table and ate alone. 

Mind you, the rest of my progress could not be described as a blink-and-you’ll-miss-it metamorphosis. 

Lady Luck did not suddenly show up, run me a hot soapybath, and kiss me like she loved me. 

In fact, the only reason I didn’t become justanother statistic is because, at the last possible moment, I got to work. 

During my senior year in high school, all I cared about was working out, playingbasketball, and studying, and it was the Accountability Mirror that kept memotivated to keep pushing toward something better. 

I woke up before dawn andstarted going to the YMCA most mornings at 5 a. 

m. 

before school to hit theweights. 

I ran all the damn time, usually around the local golf course after dark. 

One night I ran thirteen miles—the most I’d ever run in my entire life. 

On that run Icame to a familiar intersection. 

It was the same street where that redneck had pulleda gun on me. 

I avoided it and ran on, covering a half mile in the opposite directionbefore something told me to turn back. 

When I arrived at that intersection a secondtime, I stopped and contemplated it. 

I was scared shitless of that street, my heartwas leaping from my chest, which is exactly why I suddenly started charging downits fucking throat. 

Within seconds, two snarling dogs got loose and chased me as the woods leaned inon both sides. 

It was all I could do to stay a step ahead of the beasts. 

I keptexpecting that truck to reappear and run me the fuck down, like some scene fromMississippi circa 1965, but I kept running, faster and faster, until I was breathless. 

Eventually the hounds of Hell gave up and loped off, and it was just me, the rhythmand steam of my breath, and that deep country quiet. 

It was cleansing. 

By the time Iturned back, my fear was gone. 

I owned that fucking street. 

From then on, I brainwashed myself into craving discomfort. 

If it was raining, Iwould go run. 

Whenever it started snowing, my mind would say, Get your fucking running shoes on. 

Sometimes I wussed out and had to deal with it at theAccountability Mirror. 

But facing that mirror, facing myself, motivated me to fightthrough uncomfortable experiences, and, as a result, I became tougher. 

And beingtough and resilient helped me meet my goals. 

Nothing was as hard for me as learning. 

The kitchen table became my all-day, all-night study hall. 

After I’d failed the ASVAB a second time, my mother realized thatI was serious about the Air Force, so she found me a tutor who helped me figure outa system I could use to learn. 

That system was memorization. 

I couldn’t learn justby scratching a few notes and memorizing those. 

I had to read a text book and writeeach page down in my notebook. 

Then do it again a second and third time. 

That’show knowledge stuck to the mirror of my mind. 

Not through learning, but throughtranscription, memorization, and recall. 

I did that for English. 

I did that for history. 

I wrote out and memorized formulas foralgebra. 

If my tutor took an hour to teach me a lesson, I had to go back over mynotes from that session for six hours to lock it in. 

My personal study hall scheduleand goals became Post-It notes on my Accountability Mirror, and guess whathappened? I developed an obsession for learning. 

Over six months I went from having a fourth grade reading level to that of a seniorin high school. 

My vocabulary mushroomed. 

I wrote out thousands of flash cardsand went over them for hours, days, and weeks. 

I did the same for mathematicalformulas. 

Part of it was survival instinct. 

I damn sure wasn’t going to get intocollege based on academics, and though I was a starter on the varsity basketballteam my senior year, no college scouts knew my name. 

All I knew was that I had toget the fuck out of Brazil, Indiana; that the military was my best chance; and to getthere I had to pass the ASVAB. 

On my third try, I met the minimum standard for theAir Force. 

Living with purpose changed everything for me—at least in the short term. 

Duringmy senior year in high school, studying and working out gave my mind so muchenergy that hate flaked from my soul like used-up snake skin. 

The resentment I heldtoward the racists in Brazil, the emotion that had dominated me and was burning meup inside, dissipated because I’d finally considered the fucking source. 

I looked at the people who were making me feel uncomfortable and realized howuncomfortable they were in their own skin. 

To make fun of or try to intimidatesomeone they didn’t even know based on race alone was a clear indication thatsomething was very wrong with them, not me. 

But when you have no confidence itbecomes easy to value other people’s opinions, and I was valuing everyone’sopinion without considering the minds that generated them. 

That sounds silly, butit’s an easy trap to fall into, especially when you are insecure on top of being theonly. 

As soon as I made that connection, being upset with them was not worth mytime. 

Because if I was gonna kick their ass in life, and I was, I had way too muchshit to do. 

Each insult or dismissive gesture became more fuel for the enginerevving inside me. 

By the time I graduated, I knew that the confidence I’d managed to develop didn’tcome from a perfect family or God-given talent. 

It came from personalaccountability which brought me self respect, and self respect will always light away forward. 

 For me, it lit up a path straight out of Brazil, forever. 

But I didn’t get away clean. 

When you transcend a place in time that has challenged you to the core, it can feellike you’ve won a war. 

Don’t fall for that mirage. 

Your past, your deepest fears,have a way of going dormant before springing back to life at double strength. 

Youmust remain vigilant. 

For me, the Air Force revealed that I was still soft inside. 

Iwas still insecure. 

I wasn’t yet hard of bone and mind. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com  CHALLENGE #2It’s time to come eyeball to eyeball with yourself, and get raw and real. 

This is not aself-love tactic. 

You can’t fluff it. 

Don’t massage your ego. 

This is about abolishingthe ego and taking the first step toward becoming the real you!I tacked Post-It notes on my Accountability Mirror, and I’ll ask you to do the same. 

Digital devices won’t work. 

Write all your insecurities, dreams, and goals on Post-Its and tag up your mirror. 

If you need more education, remind yourself that youneed to start working your ass off because you aren’t smart enough! Period, pointblank. 

If you look in the mirror and see someone who is obviously overweight, thatmeans you’re fucking fat! Own it! It’s okay to be unkind with yourself in thesemoments because we need thicker skin to improve in life. 

Whether it’s a career goal (quit my job, start a business), a lifestyle goal (loseweight, get more active), or an athletic one (run my first 5K, 10K, or marathon),you need to be truthful with yourself about where you are and the necessary steps itwill take to achieve those goals, day by day. 

Each step, each necessary point of self-improvement, should be written as its own note. 

That means you have to do someresearch and break it all down. 

For example, if you are trying to lose forty pounds,your first Post-It may be to lose two pounds in the first week. 

Once that goal isachieved, remove the note and post the next goal of two to five pounds until yourultimate goal is realized. 

Whatever your goal, you’ll need to hold yourself accountable for the small steps itwill take to get there. 

Self-improvement takes dedication and self-discipline. 

Thedirty mirror you see every day is going to reveal the truth. 

Stop ignoring it. 

Use it toyour advantage. 

If you feel it, post an image of yourself staring into your tagged-upAccountability Mirror on social media with the hashtags #canthurtme#accountabilitymirror. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com   CHAPTER THREE 3. 

THE IMPOSSIBLE TASKIt was past midnight and the streets were dead. 

I steered my pickup truck intoanother empty parking lot and killed the engine. 

In the quiet all I could hear werethe eerie halogen hum of the street lamps and the scratch of my pen as I checked offanother franchise feed trough. 

The latest in a never-ending series of fast food anddine-in industrial kitchens that received more nightly visitors than you’d care toknow about. 

That’s why guys like me showed up to places like this in the weehours. 

I stuffed my clipboard under the armrest, grabbed my gear, and beganrestocking rat traps. 

They’re everywhere, those little green boxes. 

Look around almost any restaurantand you’ll find them, hidden in plain sight. 

My job was to bait, move, or replacethem. 

Sometimes I hit pay dirt and found a rat carcass, which never caught me bysurprise. 

You know death when you smell it. 

This wasn’t the mission I signed up for when I enlisted in the Air Force with dreamsof joining a Pararescue unit. 

Back then I was nineteen years old and weighed 175pounds. 

By the time I was discharged four years later, I had ballooned to nearly 300pounds and was on a different kind of patrol. 

At that weight, even bending down tobait the traps took effort. 

I was so damn fat I had to sew an athletic sock into thecrotch of my work pants so they wouldn’t split when I dropped to one knee. 

Nobullshit. 

I was a sorry fucking sight. 

With the exterior handled, it was time to venture indoors, which was its ownwilderness. 

I had keys to almost every restaurant in this part of Indianapolis, andtheir alarm codes too. 

Once inside, I pumped my hand-held silver canister full ofpoison and placed a fumigation mask over my face. 

I looked like a damn spacealien in that thing, with its dual filters jutting out from my mouth, protecting mefrom toxic fumes. 

Protecting me. 

If there was anything I liked about that job it was the stealth nature of working late,moving in and out of inky shadows. 

I loved that mask for the same reason. 

It wasvital, and not because of any damn insecticide. 

I needed it because it made itimpossible for anyone to see me, especially me. 

Even if by chance I caught my ownreflection in a glass doorway or on a stainless steel countertop, it wasn’t me I wasseeing. 

It was some janky-ass, low-budget storm trooper. 

The kind of guy whowould palm yesterday’s brownies on his way out the door. 

It wasn’t me. 

 Sometimes I’d see roaches scurry for cover when I flipped the lights on to spraydown the counters and the tiled floors. 

I’d see dead rodents stuck to sticky traps I’dlaid on previous visits. 

I bagged and dumped them. 

I checked the lighting systemsI’d installed to catch moths and flies and cleaned those out too. 

Within a half hour Iwas gone, rolling on to the next restaurant. 

I had a dozen stops every night and hadto hit them all before dawn. 

Maybe this kind of gig sounds disgusting to you. 

When I think back I’m disgustedtoo, but not because of the job. 

It was honest work. 

Necessary. 

Hell, in Air Forceboot camp I got on the wrong side of my first drill sergeant and she made me thelatrine queen. 

It was my job to keep the latrines in our barracks shining. 

She told methat if she found one speck of dirt in that latrine at any moment I would get recycledback to day one and join a new flight. 

I took my discipline. 

I was happy just to be inthe Air Force, and I cleaned the hell out of that latrine. 

You could have eaten off thatfloor. 

Four years later, the guy who was so energized by opportunity that he wasexcited to clean latrines was gone and I didn’t feel anything at all. 

They say there’s always light at the end of the tunnel, but not once your eyes adjustto the darkness, and that’s what happened to me. 

I was numb. 

Numb to my life,miserable in my marriage, and I’d accepted that reality. 

I was a would-be warriorturned cockroach sniper on the graveyard shift. 

Just another zombie selling his timeon earth, going through the motions. 

In fact, the only insight I had into my job atthat time was that it was actually a step up. 

When I was first discharged from the military I got a job at St. 

Vincent’s Hospital. 

Iworked security from 11 p. 

m. 

to 7 a. 

m. 

for minimum wage and cleared about $700a month. 

Every now and then I’d see an Ecolab truck pull up. 

We were on theexterminator’s regular rotation, and it was my job to unlock the hospital kitchen forhim. 

One night we got to talking, and he mentioned that Ecolab was hiring, and thatthe job came with a free truck and no boss looking over your shoulder. 

It was also a35 percent pay raise. 

I didn’t think about the health risks. 

I didn’t think at all. 

I wastaking what was being offered. 

I was on that spoon-fed path of least resistance,letting dominoes fall on my head, and it was killing me slowly. 

But there’s adifference between being numb and clueless. 

In the dark night there weren’t a lot ofdistractions to get me out of my head, and I knew that I had tipped the first domino. 

I’d started the chain reaction that put me on Ecolab duty. 

The Air Force should have been my way out. 

That first drill sergeant did end uprecycling me into a different unit, and in my new flight I became a star recruit. 

Iwas 6’2” and weighed about 175 pounds. 

I was fast and strong, our unit was thebest flight in all of boot camp, and soon I was training for my dream job: Air ForcePararescue. 

We were guardian angels with fangs, trained to drop from the skybehind enemy lines and pull downed pilots out of harm’s way. 

I was one of the bestguys in that training. 

I was one of the best at push-ups, and the best at sit-ups, flutterkicks, and running. 

I was one point behind honor grad, but there was somethingthey didn’t talk about in the lead-up to Pararescue training: water confidence. 

That’sa nice name for a course where they try to drown your ass for weeks, and I wasuncomfortable as hell in the water. 

Although my mom got us off the public dole and out of subsidized housing withinthree years, she still didn’t have extra cash for swim lessons, and we avoided pools. 

It wasn’t until I attended Boy Scout camp when I was twelve years old that I was finally confronted with swimming. 

Leaving Buffalo allowed me to join the Scouts,and camp was my best opportunity to score all the merit badges I’d need to stay onthe path to becoming an Eagle Scout. 

One morning it was time to qualify for theswimming merit badge and that meant a one-mile swim in a lake course, marked offwith buoys. 

All the other kids jumped in and started getting after it, and if I wantedto save face I had to pretend I knew what I was doing, so I followed them into thelake. 

I dog paddled the best I could, but kept swallowing water so I flipped onto myback and ended up swimming the entire mile with a fucked-up backstroke I’dimprovised on the fly. 

Merit badge secured. 

  Boy ScoutsWhen it came time to take the swim test to get into Pararescue, I needed to be ableto swim for real. 

This was a timed, 500-meter freestyle swim, and even at nineteen years old I didn’t know how to swim freestyle. 

So I took my stunted ass down toBarnes & Noble, bought Swimming for Dummies, studied the diagrams, andpracticed in the pool every day. 

I hated putting my face in the water, but I’d managefor one stroke, then two, and before long I could swim an entire lap. 

I wasn’t as buoyant as most swimmers. 

Whenever I stopped swimming, even for amoment, I’d start to sink, which made my heart pound with panic, and my increasedtension just made it worse. 

Eventually, I passed that swim test, but there is adifference between being competent and comfortable in the water, another big gapfrom comfortable to confident, and when you can’t float like most people, waterconfidence does not come easy. 

Sometimes it doesn’t come at all. 

In Pararescue training, water confidence is part of the ten-week program, and it’sfilled with specific evolutions designed to test how well we perform in the waterunder stress. 

One of the worst evolutions for me was called Bobbing. 

The class wasdivided into groups of five, lined up from gutter to gutter in the shallow end, andfully kitted up. 

Our backs were strapped with twin eighty-liter tanks made fromgalvanized steel, and we wore sixteen-pound weight belts too. 

We were loaded thefuck down, which would have been fine, except in this evolution we weren’tallowed to breathe from those tanks. 

Instead, we were told to walk backward downthe slope of the pool from the three-foot section to the deep end, about ten feetdown, and on that slow walk into position, my mind swirled with doubt andnegativity. 

What the fuck are you doing here? This isn’t for you! You can’t swim! You’re animposter and they will find you out!Time slowed down and those seconds seemed like minutes. 

My diaphragm lurched,trying to force air into my lungs. 

Theoretically, I knew that relaxation was the keyto all the underwater evolutions, but I was too terrified to let go. 

My jaw clenchedas tight as my fists. 

My head throbbed as I worked to stave off panic. 

Finally, wewere all in position and it was time to start bobbing. 

That meant pushing up fromthe bottom to the surface (without the benefit of finning), getting a gulp of air, andsinking back down. 

It wasn’t easy, getting up fully loaded, but at least I was able tobreathe, and that first breath was a salvation. 

Oxygen flooded my system and Istarted to relax until the instructor yelled “Switch!” That was our cue to take ourfins from our feet, place them on our hands, and use one pull with our arms topropel ourselves to the surface. 

We were allowed to push off the floor of the pool,but we couldn’t kick. 

We did that for five minutes. 

Shallow water and surface blackouts aren’t uncommon during water confidencetraining. 

It goes along with stressing the body and limiting oxygen intake. 

With theflippers on my hands I’d barely get my face high enough out of the water to breathe,and in between I was working hard and burning oxygen. 

And when you burn toomuch too fast, your brain shuts down and you will black the fuck out. 

Ourinstructors called that, “meeting the wizard. 

” As the clock ticked, I could see starsmaterializing in my peripheral vision and felt the wizard creeping close. 

I passed that evolution, and soon, finning with my arms or feet became easy for me. 

What stayed hard from beginning to end was one of our simplest tasks: treadingwater without our hands. 

We had to keep our hands and our chins high above thewater, using only our legs, which we’d swirl in a blender-like motion, for three minutes. 

That doesn’t sound like much time, and for most of the class it was easy. 

For me, it was damn near impossible. 

My chin kept hitting the water, which meantthe time would start again from triple zero. 

All around me, my classmates were socomfortable their legs were barely moving, while mine were whirring at top speed,and I still couldn’t get half as high as those white boys who looked to be defyinggravity. 

Every day it was another humiliation in the pool. 

Not that I was embarrassedpublicly. 

I passed all the evolutions, but inside I was suffering. 

Each night, I’d fixateon the next day’s task and become so terrified I couldn’t sleep, and soon my fearmorphed into resentment toward my classmates who, in my mind, had it easy,which dredged up my past. 

I was the only black man in my unit, which reminded me of my childhood in ruralIndiana, and the harder the water confidence training became, the higher those darkwaters would rise until it seemed I was also being drowned from the inside out. 

While the rest of my class was sleeping, that potent cocktail of fear and ragethrummed through my veins and my nocturnal fixations became their own kind ofself-fulfilling prophecy. 

One where failure was inevitable because my uncheckedfear was unleashing something I couldn’t control: the quitting mind. 

It all came to a head six weeks into training with the “buddy breathing” exercise. 

We partnered up, each pair gripped one another by the forearm, and took turnsbreathing through just one snorkel. 

Meanwhile, the instructors thrashed us, trying toseparate us from our snorkel. 

All of this was supposed to be happening at or nearthe surface, but I was negatively buoyant, which meant I was sinking into themiddle waters of the deep end, dragging my partner down with me. 

He’d take abreath and pass the snorkel down to me. 

I’d swim to the surface, exhale and attemptto clear the water from our snorkel and get a clean breath before passing it back tohim, but the instructors made that almost impossible. 

I’d usually only clear the tubehalfway, and inhale more water than air. 

From the jump, I was operating from anoxygen deficit while fighting to stay near the surface. 

In military training, it’s the instructors’ job to identify weak links and challengethem to perform or quit, and they could tell I was struggling. 

In the pool that day,one of them was always in my face, yelling and thrashing me, while I choked,trying and failing to gulp air through a narrow tube to stave off the wizard. 

I wentunder and remember looking up at the rest of the class, splayed out like serenestarfish on the surface. 

Calm as can be, they passed their snorkels back and forthwith ease, while I fumed. 

I know now that my instructor was just doing his job, butback then I thought, This fucker’s not giving me a fair shot!I passed that evolution too, but I still had eleven more evolutions and four moreweeks of water confidence training to go. 

It made sense. 

We would be jumping outof airplanes over water. 

We needed it. 

I just didn’t want to do it anymore, and thenext morning, I was offered a way out I hadn’t seen coming. 

Weeks earlier, we’d had our blood drawn during a med check, and the doctors hadjust discovered I carried the Sickle Cell Trait. 

I didn’t have the disease, Sickle CellAnemia, but I had the trait, which was believed at the time to increase the risk ofsudden, exercise-related death due to cardiac arrest. 

The Air Force didn’t want medropping dead in the middle of an evolution and pulled me out of training on a medical. 

I pretended to take the news hard, as if my dream was being ripped away. 

Imade a big fucking act of being pissed off, but inside I was ecstatic. 

Later that week the doctors reversed their decision. 

They didn’t specifically say itwas safe for me to continue, but they said the trait wasn’t yet well understood andallowed me to decide for myself. 

When I reported back to training the MasterSergeant (MSgt) informed me that I’d missed too much time and that if I wanted tocontinue I would have to start over from day one, week one. 

Instead of less thanfour weeks, I’d have to endure another ten weeks of the terror, rage, and insomniathat came with water confidence. 

These days, that kind of thing wouldn’t even register on my radar. 

You tell me torun longer and harder than everyone else just to get a fair shake, I’d say, “Rogerthat,” and keep moving, but back then I was still half-baked. 

Physically I wasstrong, but I was not even close to mastering my mind. 

The MSgt stared at me, awaiting my response. 

I couldn’t even look him in the eyewhen I said, “You know what, Master Sergeant, the doctor doesn’t know muchabout this Sickle Cell thing, and it’s bothering me. 

”He nodded, emotionless, and signed the papers pulling me out of the program forgood. 

He cited Sickle Cell, and on paper I didn’t quit, but I knew the truth. 

If I hadbeen the guy I am today, I wouldn’t have given two fucks about Sickle Cell. 

I stillhave the Sickle Cell Trait. 

You don’t just get rid of it, but back then an obstacle hadappeared, and I’d folded. 

I moved on to Fort Campbell, Kentucky, told my friends and family that I wasforced from the program on a medical, and served out my four years in the TacticalAir Control Party (TAC-P), which works with some special operations units. 

Itrained to liaise between ground units and air support—fast movers like F-15s andF-16s—behind enemy lines. 

It was challenging work with intelligent people, butsadly I was never proud of it and didn’t see the opportunities offered because Iknew I was a quitter who had let fear dictate my future. 

I buried my shame in the gym and at the kitchen table. 

I got into powerlifting andlayered on the mass. 

I ate and worked out. 

Worked out and ate. 

In my last days inthe Air Force I weighed 255 pounds. 

After my discharge I continued to bulk up withboth muscle and fat until I weighed nearly 300 pounds. 

I wanted to be big becausebeing big hid David Goggins. 

I was able to tuck this 175-pound person into those21-inch biceps and that flabby belly. 

I grew a burly mustache and was intimidatingto everyone who saw me, but inside I knew I was a pussy, and that’s a hauntingfeeling. 

  After Air Force Boot Camp at 175 lbs in 1994    290 lbs at the beach in 1999 ***The morning I began to take charge of my destiny started out like any other. 

Whenthe clock struck 7 a. 

m. 

, my Ecolab shift ended and I hit the Steak ’n Shake drive-thru to score a large chocolate milkshake. 

Next stop, 7-Eleven, for a box of Hostessmini chocolate doughnuts. 

I gobbled those on my forty-five-minute drive home, to abeautiful apartment on a golf course in pretty Carmel, Indiana, which I shared withmy wife, Pam, and her daughter. 

Remember that Pizza Hut incident? I married thatgirl. 

I married a girl whose dad called me a nigger. 

What does that say about me?We couldn’t afford that life. 

Pam wasn’t even working, but in those credit-card-debt-loading days, nothing made much sense. 

I was doing 70 mph on the highway,mainlining sugar and listening to a local classic rock station when Sound of Silencepoured from the stereo. 

Simon & Garfunkel’s words echoed like truth. 

Darkness was a friend indeed. 

I worked in the dark, hid my true self from friendsand strangers. 

Nobody would have believed how numb and afraid I was back thenbecause I looked like a beast that no one would dare fuck with, but my mind wasn’tright, and my soul was weighed down by too much trauma and failure. 

I had everyexcuse in the world to be a loser, and used them all. 

My life was crumbling, andPam dealt with that by fleeing the scene. 

Her parents still lived in Brazil, justseventy miles away. 

We spent most of our time apart. 

I arrived home from work around 8 a. 

m. 

, and the phone rang as soon as I walked inthe door. 

It was my mother. 

She knew my routine. 

“Come on over for your staple,” she said. 

My staple was a breakfast buffet for one, the likes of which few could put down in asingle sitting. 

Think: eight Pillsbury cinnamon rolls, a half-dozen scrambled eggs, ahalf-pound of bacon, and two bowls of Fruity Pebbles. 

Don’t forget, I had justdecimated a box of donuts and a chocolate shake. 

I didn’t even have to respond. 

Sheknew I was coming. 

Food was my drug of choice and I always sucked up every lastcrumb. 

I hung up, flipped on the television, and stomped down the hall to the shower,where I could hear a narrator’s voice filter through the steam. 

I caught snippets. 

“Navy SEALs…toughest…the world. 

” I wrapped a towel around my waist andrushed back into the living room. 

I was so big, the towel barely covered my fat ass,but I sat down on the couch and didn’t move for thirty minutes. 

 The show followed Basic Underwater Demolition SEAL (BUD/S) Training Class224 through Hell Week: the most arduous series of tasks in the most physicallydemanding training in the military. 

I watched men sweat and suffer as they torethrough muddy obstacle courses, ran on the soft sand holding logs overhead, andshivered in icy surf. 

Sweat pearled on my scalp, I was literally on the edge of myseat as I saw guys—some of the strongest of them all—ring the bell and quit. 

Madesense. 

Only one-third of the men who begin BUD/S make it through Hell Week, andin all of my time in Pararescue training, I couldn’t remember feeling as awful asthese men looked. 

They were swollen, chafed, sleep-deprived, and dead on theirfeet, and I was jealous of them. 

The longer I watched the more certain I became that there were answers buried inall that suffering. 

Answers that I needed. 

More than once the camera panned overthe endless frothing ocean, and each time I felt pathetic. 

The SEALs wereeverything I wasn’t. 

They were about pride, dignity, and the type of excellence thatcame from bathing in the fire, getting beat the fuck down, and going back for more,again and again. 

They were the human equivalent of the hardest, sharpest swordyou could imagine. 

They sought out the flame, took the pounding for as long asnecessary, longer even, until they were fearless and deadly. 

They weren’t motivated. 

They were driven. 

The show ended with graduation. 

Twenty-two proud men stoodshoulder to shoulder in their dress whites before the camera pushed in on theirCommanding Officer. 

“In a society where mediocrity is too often the standard and too often rewarded,” hesaid, “there is intense fascination with men who detest mediocrity, who refuse todefine themselves in conventional terms, and who seek to transcend traditionallyrecognized human capabilities. 

This is exactly the type of person BUD/S is meantto find. 

The man who finds a way to complete each and every task to the best of hisability. 

The man who will adapt and overcome any and all obstacles. 

”In that moment it felt as though the Commanding Officer was talking directly tome, but after the show ended I walked back to the bathroom, faced the mirror, andstared myself down. 

I looked every bit of 300 pounds. 

I was everything all thehaters back home said I would be: uneducated, with no real world skills, zerodiscipline, and a dead-end future. 

Mediocrity would have been a major promotion. 

Iwas at the bottom of the barrel of life, pooling in the dregs, but, for the first time inway too long, I was awake. 

I barely spoke to my mother during breakfast, and only ate half my staple becausemy mind was on unfinished business. 

I’d always wanted to join an elite specialoperations unit, and beneath all the rolls of flesh and layers of failure, that desirewas still there. 

Now it was coming back to life, thanks to a chance viewing of ashow that continued to work on me like a virus moving cell to cell, taking over. 

It became an obsession I couldn’t shake. 

Every morning after work for almost threeweeks, I called active duty recruiters in the Navy and told them my story. 

I calledoffices all over the country. 

I said I was willing to move as long as they could getme to SEAL training. 

Everyone turned me down. 

Most weren’t interested incandidates with prior service. 

One local recruiting office was intrigued and wantedto meet in person, but when I got there they laughed in my face. 

I was way tooheavy, and in their eyes I was just another delusional pretender. 

I left that meetingfeeling the same way. 

 After calling all the active duty recruiting offices I could find, I dialed the local unitof the Naval reserves, and spoke to Petty Officer Steven Schaljo for the first time. 

Schaljo had worked with multiple F-14 Squadrons as an electrician and instructor atNAS Miramar for eight years before joining the recruitment staff in San Diego,where the SEALs train. 

He worked day and night and rose quickly in the ranks. 

Hismove to Indianapolis came with a promotion and the challenge of finding Navyrecruits in the middle of the corn. 

He’d only been on the job in Indy for ten days bythe time I called, and if I’d reached anyone else you probably wouldn’t be readingthis book. 

But through a combination of dumb luck and stubborn persistence Ifound one of the finest recruiters in the Navy, a guy whose favorite task wasdiscovering diamonds in the rough—prior service guys like me who were lookingto re-enlist and hoping to land in special operations. 

Our initial conversation didn’t last long. 

He said he could help me and that I shouldcome in to meet in person. 

That sounded familiar. 

I grabbed my keys and drovestraight to his office, but didn’t get my hopes too high. 

By the time I arrived a half-hour later he was already on the phone with BUD/S administration. 

Every sailor in that office—all of them white—were surprised to see me exceptSchaljo. 

If I was a heavyweight, Schaljo was a lightweight at 5’7”, but he didn’tseem fazed by my size, at least not at first. 

He was outgoing and warm, like anysalesman, though I could tell he had some pit bull in him. 

He led me down a hall toweigh me in, and while standing on the scale I eyed a weight chart pinned to thewall. 

At my height, the maximum allowable weight for the Navy was 191 pounds. 

Iheld my breath, sucked in my gut as much as I could, and puffed out my chest in asorry attempt to stave off the humiliating moment where he’d let me down easy. 

That moment never came. 

“You’re a big boy,” Schaljo said, smiling and shaking his head, as he scratched 297pounds on a chart in his file folder. 

“The Navy has a program that allows recruits inthe reserves to become active duty. 

That’s what we’ll use for this. 

It’s being phasedout at the end of the year, so we need to get you classed up before then. 

Point is,you have some work to do, but you knew that. 

” I followed his eyes to the weightchart and checked it again. 

He nodded, smiled, patted me on the shoulder, and leftme to face my truth. 

I had less than three months to lose 106 pounds. 

It sounded like an impossible task, which is one reason I didn’t quit my job. 

Theother was the ASVAB. 

That nightmare test had come back to life like Frankenstein’sfucking monster. 

I’d passed it once before to enlist in the Air Force, but to qualifyfor BUD/S I’d have to score much higher. 

For two weeks I studied all day andzapped pests each night. 

I wasn’t working out yet. 

Serious weight loss would haveto wait. 

I took the test on a Saturday afternoon. 

The following Monday I called Schaljo. 

“Welcome to the Navy,” he said. 

He downloaded the good news first. 

I’d doneexceptionally well on some sections and was now officially a reservist, but I’d onlyscored a 44 on Mechanical Comprehension. 

To qualify for BUD/S I needed a 50. 

I’d have to retake the entire test in five weeks. 

 These days Steven Schaljo likes to call our chance connection “fate. 

” He said hecould sense my drive the first moment we spoke, and that he believed in me fromthe jump, which is why my weight wasn’t an issue for him, but after that ASVABtest I was full of doubt. 

So maybe what happened later that night was also a form offate, or a much needed dose of divine intervention. 

I’m not going to drop the name of the restaurant where it went down because if Idid you’d never eat there again and I’d have to hire a lawyer. 

Just know, this placewas a disaster. 

I checked the traps outside first and found a dead rat. 

Inside, therewere more dead rodents—a mouse and two rats—on the sticky traps, and roaches inthe garbage which hadn’t been emptied. 

I shook my head, got down on my kneesunder the sink, and sprayed up through a narrow gap in the wall. 

I didn’t know ityet, but I’d found their nesting column and when the poison hit they started toscatter. 

Within seconds there was a skittering across the back of my neck. 

I brushed it off,and craned my neck to see a storm of roaches raining down to the kitchen floorfrom an open panel in the ceiling. 

I’d hit the motherlode of cockroaches and theworst infestation I ever saw on the job for Ecolab. 

They kept coming. 

Roacheslanded on my shoulders and my head. 

The floor was writhing with them. 

I left my canister in the kitchen, grabbed the sticky traps, and burst outside. 

Ineeded fresh air and more time to figure out how I was going to clear the restaurantof vermin. 

I considered my options on my way to the dumpster to trash the rodents,opened the lid, and found a live raccoon, hissing mad. 

He bared his yellow teethand lunged at me. 

I slammed the dumpster shut. 

What the fuck? I mean, seriously, what the fucking fuck? When was enough trulygoing to be enough? Was I willing to let my sorry present become a fucked-upfuture? How much longer would I wait, how many more years would I burn,wondering if there was some greater purpose out there waiting for me? I knew rightthen that if I didn’t make a stand and start walking the path of most resistance, Iwould end up in this mental hell forever. 

I didn’t go back inside that restaurant. 

I didn’t collect my gear. 

I started my truck,stopped for a chocolate shake—my comfort tea at that time—and drove home. 

Itwas still dark when I pulled up. 

I didn’t care. 

I stripped off my work clothes, put onsome sweats and laced up my running shoes. 

I hadn’t run in over a year, but I hit thestreets ready to go four miles. 

I lasted 400 yards. 

My heart raced. 

I was so dizzy I had to sit down on the edge ofthe golf course to catch my breath before making the slow walk back to my house,where my melted shake was waiting to comfort me in yet another failure. 

I grabbedit, slurped, and slumped into my sofa. 

My eyes welled with tears. 

Who the fuck did I think I was? I was born nothing, I’d proven nothing, and I stillwasn’t worth a damn thing. 

David Goggins, a Navy SEAL? Yeah, right. 

What apipe dream. 

I couldn’t even run down the block for five minutes. 

All my fears andinsecurities I’d bottled up for my entire life started raining down on my head. 

I wason the verge of giving in and giving up for good. 

That’s when I found my old, beatto shit VHS copy of Rocky (the one I’d had for fifteen years), slid it into themachine, and fast forwarded to my favorite scene: Round 14. 

 The original Rocky is still one of my all-time favorite films because it’s about aknow-nothing journeyman fighter living in poverty with no prospects. 

Even his owntrainer won’t work with him. 

Then, out of the blue, he’s given a title shot with thechampion, Apollo Creed, the most feared fighter in history, a man that has knockedout every opponent he’s ever faced. 

All Rocky wants is to be the first to go thedistance with Creed. 

That alone will make him someone he could be proud of forthe first time in his life. 

The fight is closer than anyone anticipated, bloody and intense, and by the middlerounds Rocky is taking on more and more punishment. 

He’s losing the fight, and inRound 14 he gets knocked down early, but pops right back up in the center of thering. 

Apollo moves in, stalking him like a lion. 

He throws sharp left jabs, hits aslow-footed Rocky with a staggering combination, lands a punishing right hook,and another. 

He backs Rocky into a corner. 

Rocky’s legs are jelly. 

He can’t evenmuster the strength to raise his arms in defense. 

Apollo slams another right hookinto the side of Rocky’s head, then a left hook, and a vicious right-handed uppercutthat puts Rocky down. 

Apollo retreats to the opposite corner with his arms held high, but even face downin that ring, Rocky doesn’t give up. 

As the referee begins his ten-count, Rockysquirms toward the ropes. 

Mickey, his own trainer, urges him to stay down, butRocky isn’t hearing it. 

He pulls himself up to one knee, then all fours. 

The refereehits six as Rocky grabs the ropes and rises up. 

The crowd roars, and Apollo turns tosee him still standing. 

Rocky waves Apollo over. 

The champ’s shoulders slump indisbelief. 

The fight isn’t over yet. 

I turned off the television and thought about my own life. 

It was a life devoid of anydrive and passion, but I knew if I continued to surrender to my fear and my feelingsof inadequacy, I would be allowing them to dictate my future forever. 

My onlyother choice was to try to find the power in the emotions that had laid me low,harness and use them to empower me to rise up, which is exactly what I did. 

I dumped that shake in the trash, laced up my shoes, and hit the streets again. 

Onmy first run, I felt severe pain in my legs and my lungs at a quarter mile. 

My heartraced and I stopped. 

This time I felt the same pain, my heart raced like a car runninghot, but I ran through it and the pain faded. 

By the time I bent over to catch mybreath, I’d run a full mile. 

That’s when I first realized that not all physical and mental limitations are real, andthat I had a habit of giving up way too soon. 

I also knew that it would take everyounce of courage and toughness I could muster to pull off the impossible. 

I wasstaring at hours, days, and weeks of non-stop suffering. 

I would have to push myselfto the very edge of my mortality. 

I had to accept the very real possibility that Imight die because this time I wouldn’t quit, no matter how fast my heart raced andno matter how much pain I was in. 

Trouble was there was no battle plan to follow,no blueprint. 

I had to create one from scratch. 

The typical day went something like this. 

I’d wake up at 4:30 a. 

m. 

, munch abanana, and hit the ASVAB books. 

Around 5 a. 

m. 

, I’d take that book to mystationary bike where I’d sweat and study for two hours. 

Remember, my body was a mess. 

I couldn’t run multiple miles yet, so I had to burn as many calories as I couldon the bike. 

After that I’d drive over to Carmel High School and jump into the poolfor a two-hour swim. 

From there I hit the gym for a circuit workout that includedthe bench press, the incline press, and lots of leg exercises. 

Bulk was the enemy. 

Ineeded reps, and I did five or six sets of 100–200 reps each. 

Then it was back to thestationary bike for two more hours. 

I was constantly hungry. 

Dinner was my one true meal each day, but there wasn’tmuch to it. 

I ate a grilled or sautéed chicken breast and some sautéed vegetablesalong with a thimble of rice. 

After dinner I’d do another two hours on the bike, hitthe sack, wake up and do it all over again, knowing the odds were stacked sky highagainst me. 

What I was trying to achieve is like a D-student applying to Harvard, orwalking into a casino and putting every single dollar you own on a number inroulette and acting as if winning is a foregone conclusion. 

I was betting everything Ihad on myself with no guarantees. 

I weighed myself twice daily, and within two weeks I’d dropped twenty-fivepounds. 

My progress only improved as I kept grinding, and the weight startedpeeling off. 

Ten days later I was at 250, light enough to begin doing push-ups, pull-ups, and to start running my ass off. 

I’d still wake up, hit the stationary bike, thepool, and the gym, but I also incorporated two-, three-, and four-mile runs. 

I ditchedmy running shoes and ordered a pair of Bates Lites, the same boots SEALcandidates wear in BUD/S, and started running in those. 

With so much effort, you’d think my nights would have been restful, but they werefilled with anxiety. 

My stomach growled and my mind swirled. 

I’d dream ofcomplex ASVAB questions and dread the next day’s workouts. 

I was putting out somuch, on almost no fuel, that depression became a natural side effect. 

Mysplintering marriage was veering toward divorce. 

Pam made it very clear that sheand my stepdaughter would not be moving to San Diego with me, if by somemiracle I could pull this off. 

They stayed in Brazil most of the time, and when I wasall alone in Carmel, I was in turmoil. 

I felt both worthless and helpless as myendless stream of self-defeating thoughts picked up steam. 

When depression smothers you, it blots out all light and leaves you with nothing tocling onto for hope. 

All you see is negativity. 

For me, the only way to make itthrough that was to feed off my depression. 

I had to flip it and convince myself thatall that self-doubt and anxiety was confirmation that I was no longer living anaimless life. 

My task may turn out to be impossible but at least I was back on amotherfucking mission. 

Some nights, when I was feeling low, I’d call Schaljo. 

He was always in the officeearly in the morning and late at night. 

I didn’t confide in him about my depressionbecause I didn’t want him to doubt me. 

I used those calls to pump myself up. 

I toldhim how many pounds I dropped and how much work I was putting in, and hereminded me to keep studying for that ASVAB. 

Roger that. 

I had the Rocky soundtrack on cassette and I’d listen to Going the Distance forinspiration. 

On long bike rides and runs, with those horns blasting in my brain, I’dimagine myself going through BUD/S, diving into cold water, and crushing Hell Week. 

I was wishing, I was hoping, but by the time I was down to 250, my quest toqualify for the SEALs wasn’t a daydream anymore. 

I had a real chance toaccomplish something most people, including myself, thought was impossible. 

Still,there were bad days. 

One morning not long after I dipped below 250, I weighed inand had only lost a pound from the day before. 

I had so much weight to lose I couldnot afford to plateau. 

That’s all I thought about while running six miles andswimming two. 

I was exhausted and sore when I arrived in the gym for my typicalthree-hour circuit. 

After rocking over 100 pull-ups in a series of sets, I was back on the bar for a maxset with no ceiling. 

Going in, my goal was to get to twelve but my hands wereburning fire as I stretched my chin over the bar for the tenth time. 

For weeks, thetemptation to pull back had been ever present, and I always refused. 

That day,however, the pain was too much and after my eleventh pull-up, I gave in, droppeddown, and finished my workout, one pull-up shy. 

That one rep stayed with me, along with that one pound. 

I tried to get them out ofmy head but they wouldn’t leave me the fuck alone. 

They taunted me on the drivehome, and at my kitchen table while I ate a sliver of grilled chicken and a bland,baked potato. 

I knew I wouldn’t sleep that night unless I did something about it, so Igrabbed my keys. 

“You cut corners and you are not gonna fucking make it,” I said, out loud, as Idrove back to the gym. 

“There are no shortcuts for you, Goggins!”I did my entire pull-up workout over again. 

One missed pull-up cost me an extra250, and there would be similar episodes. 

Whenever I cut a run or swim shortbecause I was hungry or tired, I’d always go back and beat myself down evenharder. 

That was the only way I could manage the demons in my mind. 

Either waythere would be suffering. 

I had to choose between physical suffering in the moment,and the mental anguish of wondering if that one missed pull-up, that last lap in thepool, the quarter mile I skipped on the road or trail, would end up costing me anopportunity of a lifetime. 

It was an easy choice. 

When it came to the SEALs, Iwasn’t leaving anything up to chance. 

On the eve of the ASVAB, with four weeks to go before training, making weightwas no longer a worry. 

I was already down to 215 pounds and was faster andstronger than I’d ever been. 

I was running six miles a day, bicycling over twentymiles, and swimming more than two. 

All of it in the dead of winter. 

My favorite runwas the six-mile Monon trail, an asphalt bike and walking path that laced throughthe trees in Indianapolis. 

It was the domain of cyclists and soccer moms withjogging strollers, weekend warriors and seniors. 

By then Schaljo had passed alongthe Navy SEAL warning order. 

It included all the workouts I would be expected tocomplete during first phase of BUD/S, and I was happy to double them. 

I knew that190 men usually class-up for a typical SEAL training and only about forty peoplemake it all the way through. 

I didn’t want to be just one of those forty. 

I wanted tobe the best. 

But I had to pass the damn ASVAB first. 

I’d been cramming every spare second. 

If Iwasn’t working out, I was at my kitchen table, memorizing formulas and cyclingthrough hundreds of vocabulary words. 

With my physical training going well, allmy anxiety stuck to the ASVAB like paper clips to a magnet. 

This would be my last chance to take the test before my eligibility for the SEALs expired. 

I wasn’t verysmart, and based on past academic performance there was no good reason to believeI’d pass with a score high enough to qualify for the SEALs. 

If I failed, my dreamwould die, and I’d be floating without purpose once again. 

The test was held in a small classroom on Fort Benjamin Harrison in Indianapolis. 

There were about thirty people there, all of us young. 

Most were just out of highschool. 

We were each assigned an old-school desktop computer. 

In the past month,the test had been digitized and I wasn’t experienced with computers. 

I didn’t eventhink I could work the damn machine let alone answer the questions, but theprogram proved idiot proof and I settled in. 

The ASVAB  has ten sections, and I was breezing through until I reachedMechanical Comprehension, my truth serum. 

Within the hour I would have a decentidea if I’d been lying to myself or if I had the raw stuff necessary to become aSEAL. 

Whenever a question stumped me, I marked my worksheet with a dash. 

There were about thirty questions in that section and by the time I completed thetest, I’d guessed at least ten times. 

I needed some of them to go my way or I wasout. 

After completing the final section, I was prompted to send the entire bundle to theadministrator’s computer at the front of the room where the score would betabulated instantly. 

I peeked over my monitor and saw him sitting there, waiting. 

Ipointed, clicked, and left the room. 

Buzzing with nervous energy, I paced theparking lot for a few minutes before finally ducking into my Honda Accord, but Ididn’t start the engine. 

I couldn’t leave. 

I sat in the front seat for fifteen minutes with a thousand-yard stare. 

It would be atleast two days before Schaljo would call with my results, but the answer to theriddle that was my future was already solved. 

I knew exactly where it was, and Ihad to know the truth. 

I gathered myself, walked back in, and approached thefortune teller. 

“You gotta tell me what I got on this fucking test, man,” I said. 

He peered up at me,surprised, but he didn’t buckle. 

“I’m sorry, son. 

This is the government. 

There’s a system for how they do things,”he said. 

“I didn’t make the rules and I can’t bend them. 

”“Sir, you have no idea what this test means to me, to my life. 

It’s everything!” Helooked into my glassy eyes for what felt like five minutes, then turned toward hismachine. 

“I’m breaking every rule in the book right now,” he said. 

“Goggins, right?” Inodded and came around behind his seat as he scrolled through files. 

“There youare. 

Congratulations, you scored 65. 

That’s a great score. 

” He was referencing myoverall, but I didn’t care about that. 

Everything hinged on my getting a 50-spotwhere it counted most. 

“What did I get on mechanical comprehension?” He shrugged, clicked and scrolled,and there it was. 

My new favorite number glowed on his screen: 50. 

 “YES!” I shouted. 

“YES! YES!”There was still a handful of others taking the test, but this was the happiest momentin my life and I couldn’t stifle it. 

I kept screaming “YES!” at the top of my lungs. 

The administrator damn near fell out of his chair and everyone in that room staredat me like I was crazy. 

If they only knew how crazed I’d been! For two months I’ddedicated my entire existence to this one moment, and I was damn well gonna enjoyit. 

I rushed to my car and screamed some more. 

“FUCK YEAH!”On my drive home I called my mom. 

She was the one person, aside from Schaljo,who witnessed my metamorphosis. 

“I fucking did it,” I told her, tears in my eyes. 

“Ifucking did it! I’m going to be a SEAL. 

”When Schaljo came to work the next day, he got the news and called me up. 

He’dsent in my recruitment package and had just heard back that I was in! I could tell hewas happy for me, and proud that what he saw in me the first time we met turnedout to be real. 

But it wasn’t all happy days. 

My wife had given me an implied ultimatum, and nowI had a decision to make. 

Abandon the opportunity I’d worked so hard for and staymarried, or get divorced and go try to become a SEAL. 

In the end, my choice didn’thave anything to do with my feelings for Pam or her father. 

He’d apologized to me,by the way. 

It was about who I was and who I wanted to be. 

I was a prisoner in myown my mind and this opportunity was my only chance to break free. 

I celebrated my victory the way any SEAL candidate should. 

I put the fuck out. 

Thefollowing morning and for the next three weeks I spent time in the pool, strappedwith a sixteen-pound weight belt. 

I swam underwater for fifty meters at a time andwalked the length of the pool underwater, with a brick in each hand, all on a singlebreath. 

The water would not own my ass this time. 

When I was done, I’d swim a mile or two, then head to a pond near my mother’shome. 

Remember, this was Indiana—the American Midwest—in December. 

Thetrees were naked. 

Icicles hung like crystals from the eaves of houses and snowblanketed the earth in all directions, but the pond wasn’t completely frozen yet. 

Iwaded into the icy water, dressed in camo pants, a brown short sleeved t-shirt, andboots, laid back and looked into the gray sky. 

The hypothermic water washed overme, the pain was excruciating, and I fucking loved it. 

After a few minutes I got outand started running, water sloshing in my boots, sand in my underwear. 

Withinseconds my t-shirt was frozen to my chest, my pants iced at the cuffs. 

I hit the Monon trail. 

Steam poured from my nose and mouth as I grunted andslalomed speed-walkers and joggers. 

Civilians. 

Their heads turned as I picked upspeed and began sprinting, like Rocky in downtown Philly. 

I ran as fast as I couldfor as long as I could, from a past that no longer defined me, toward a futureundetermined. 

All I knew was that there would be pain and there would be purpose. 

And that I was ready. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com  CHALLENGE #3The first step on the journey toward a calloused mind is stepping outside yourcomfort zone on a regular basis. 

Dig out your journal again and write down all thethings you don’t like to do or that make you uncomfortable. 

Especially those thingsyou know are good for you. 

Now go do one of them, and do it again. 

In the coming pages, I’ll be asking you to mirror what you just read to some degree,but there is no need for you to find your own impossible task and achieve it on thefast track. 

This is not about changing your life instantly, it’s about moving theneedle bit by bit and making those changes sustainable. 

That means digging downto the micro level and doing something that sucks every day. 

Even if it’s as simpleas making your bed, doing the dishes, ironing your clothes, or getting up beforedawn and running two miles each day. 

Once that becomes comfortable, take it tofive, then ten miles. 

If you already do all those things, find something you aren’tdoing. 

We all have areas in our lives we either ignore or can improve upon. 

Findyours. 

We often choose to focus on our strengths rather than our weaknesses. 

Usethis time to make your weaknesses your strengths. 

Doing things—even small things—that make you uncomfortable will help makeyou strong. 

The more often you get uncomfortable the stronger you’ll become, andsoon you’ll develop a more productive, can-do dialogue with yourself in stressfulsituations. 

Take a photo or video of yourself in the discomfort zone, post it on social mediadescribing what you’re doing and why, and don’t forget to include the hashtags#discomfortzone #pathofmostresistance #canthurtme #impossibletask. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com   CHAPTER FOUR     4. 

TAKING     SOULSThe first concussion grenade exploded at close range, and from there everythingunraveled in slow motion. 

One minute we were chilling in the common room,bullshitting, watching war movies, getting pumped up for the battle we knew wascoming. 

Then that first explosion led to another, and suddenly Psycho Pete was inour faces, screaming at the top of his lungs, his cheeks flushed candy apple red, thatvein in his right temple throbbing. 

When he screamed, his eyes bugged out and hiswhole body shook. 

“Break! The fuck! Out! Move! Move! Move!”My boat crew sprinted for the door single-file, just like we’d planned. 

Outside,Navy SEALs were firing their M60s into the darkness toward some invisibleenemy. 

It was the bad dream we’d been waiting for our entire lives: the lucidnightmare that would define or kill us. 

Every impulse we had told us to hit the dirt,but at that moment, movement was our only option. 

The repetitive, deep bass thud of machine-gun fire penetrated our guts, the orangehalo from another explosion in the near distance provided a shock of violent beauty,and our hearts hammered as we gathered on the Grinder awaiting orders. 

This waswar alright, but it wouldn’t be fought on some foreign shore. 

This one, like mostbattles we fight in life, would be won or lost in our own minds. 

Psycho Pete stomped the pocked asphalt, his brow slick with sweat, the muzzle ofhis rifle steaming in the foggy night. 

“Welcome to Hell Week, gentlemen,” he said,calmly this time, in that sing-song Cali-surfer drawl of his. 

He looked us up anddown like a predator eyeing his kill. 

“It will be my great pleasure to watch yousuffer. 

”Oh, and there would be suffering. 

Psycho set the tempo, called out the push-ups, sit-ups, and flutter kicks, the jumping lunges and dive bombers. 

In between, he and hisfellow instructors hosed us down with freezing water, cackling the whole damntime. 

There were countless reps and set after set with no end in sight. 

My classmates were gathered close, each of us on our own stenciled frog footprints,overlooked by a statue of our patron saint: The Frogman, a scaly alien creature fromthe deep with webbed feet and hands, sharp claws, and a motherfucking six-pack. 

To his left was the infamous brass bell. 

Ever since that morning when I came homefrom cockroach duty and got sucked into the Navy SEAL show, it was this placethat I’d sought. 

The Grinder: a slab of asphalt dripping with history and misery. 

 Basic Underwater Demolition/SEAL (BUD/S) training is six months long anddivided into three phases. 

First Phase is all about physical training, or PT. 

SecondPhase is dive training, where we learn how to navigate underwater and deploystealthy, closed circuit diving systems that emit no bubbles and recycle our carbondioxide into breathable air. 

Third Phase is land warfare training. 

But when mostpeople picture BUD/S they think of First Phase because those are the weeks thattenderize new recruits until the class is literally ground down from about 120 guysto the hard, gleaming spine that are the twenty-five to forty guys who are moreworthy of the Trident. 

The emblem that tells the world we are not to be fucked with. 

BUD/S instructors do that by working guys out beyond their perceived limits, bychallenging their manhood, and insisting on objective physical standards ofstrength, stamina, and agility. 

Standards that are tested. 

In those first three weeks oftraining we had to, among other things, climb a vertical ten-meter rope, hammer ahalf-mile-long obstacle course studded with American Ninja Warrior typechallenges in under ten minutes, and run four miles on the sand in under thirty-twominutes. 

But if you ask me, all that was child’s play. 

It couldn’t even compare to thecrucible of First Phase. 

Hell Week is something entirely different. 

It’s medieval and it comes at you fast,detonating in just the third week of training. 

When the throbbing ache in ourmuscles and joints was ratcheted up high and we lived day and night with an edgy,hyperventilating feeling of our breath getting out front of our physical rhythm, ofour lungs inflating and deflating like canvas bags squeezed tight in a demon’s fists,for 130 hours straight. 

That’s a test that goes way beyond the physical and revealsyour heart and character. 

More than anything, it reveals your mindset, which isexactly what it’s designed to do. 

All of this happened at the Naval Special Warfare Command Center on prissy-assCoronado Island, a Southern California tourist trap that tucks into slender PointLoma and shelters the San Diego Marina from the open Pacific Ocean. 

But evenCali’s golden sun couldn’t pretty up the Grinder, and thank God for that. 

I liked itugly. 

That slab of agony was everything I’d ever wanted. 

Not because I loved tosuffer, but because I needed to know whether or not I had what it took to belong. 

Thing is, most people don’t. 

By the time Hell Week started, at least forty guys had already quit, and when theydid they were forced to walk over to the bell, ring it three times, and place theirhelmet on the concrete. 

The ringing of the bell was first brought in during theVietnam era because so many guys were quitting during evolutions and just walkingoff to the barracks. 

The bell was a way to keep track of guys, but since then it’sbecome a ritual that a man has to perform to own the fact that he’s quitting. 

To thequitter, the bell is closure. 

To me, every clang sounded like progress. 

I never liked Psycho much, but I couldn’t quibble with the specifics of his job. 

Heand his fellow instructors were there to cull the herd. 

Plus, he wasn’t going after therunts. 

He was in my face plenty, and guys bigger than me too. 

Even the smallerdudes were studs. 

I was one man in a fleet of alpha specimens from back East anddown South, the blue-collar and big-money surf beaches of California, a few fromcorn country like me, and plenty from the Texas rangeland. 

Every BUD/S class hastheir share of hard-ass backcountry Texans. 

No state puts more SEALs in the pipeline. 

Must be something in the barbecue, but Psycho didn’t play favorites. 

Nomatter where we were from or who we were, he lingered like a shadow we couldn’tshake. 

Laughing, screaming, or quietly taunting us to our face, attempting to burrowinto the brain of any man he tried to break. 

Despite all that, the first hour of Hell Week was actually fun. 

During breakout, thatmad rush of explosions, shooting, and shouting, you are not even thinking about thenightmare to come. 

You’re riding an adrenaline high because you know you’refulfilling a rite of passage within a hallowed warrior tradition. 

Guys are lookingaround the Grinder, practically giddy, thinking, “Yeah, we’re in Hell Week,motherfuckers!” Ah, but reality has a way of kicking everyone in the teeth sooneror later. 

“You call this putting out?” Psycho Pete asked no one in particular. 

“This may bethe single sorriest class we ever put through our program. 

You men are straight upembarrassing yourselves. 

”He relished this part of the job. 

Stepping over and between us, his boot print in ourpooling sweat and saliva, snot, tears, and blood. 

He thought he was hard. 

All theinstructors did, and they were because they were SEALs. 

That fact alone placedthem in rare air. 

“You boys couldn’t have held my jock when I went through HellWeek, I’ll tell you that much. 

”I smiled to myself and kept hammering as Psycho brushed by. 

He was built like atailback, quick and strong, but was he a mortal fucking weapon during his HellWeek? Sir, I doubt that very fucking much, sir!He caught the eye of his boss, the First Phase Officer in Charge. 

There was nodoubt about him. 

He didn’t talk a whole lot and didn’t have to. 

He was 6’1”, but hecast a longer shadow. 

Dude was jacked too. 

I’m talking about 225 pounds of musclewrapped tight as steel, without an ounce of sympathy. 

He looked like a SilverbackGorilla (SBG), and loomed like a Godfather of pain, making silent calculations,taking mental notes. 

“Sir, my dick’s getting stiff just thinking about these gaping vaginas weeping andquitting like whiny little bitches this week,” Psycho said. 

SBG offered half a nod asPsycho stared through me. 

“Oh, and you will quit,” he said softly. 

“I’ll make sureof that. 

”Psycho’s threats were spookier when he delivered them in a relaxed tone like that,but there were plenty of times when his eyes went dark, his brow twisted, the bloodrushed to his face, and he unleashed a scream that built from the tips of his toes tothe crown of his bald head. 

An hour into Hell Week, he knelt down, pressed his facewithin an inch of my own while I finished another set of push-ups, and let loose. 

“Hit the surf, you miserable fucking turds!”We’d been in BUD/S for nearly three weeks by then, and we’d raced up and overthe fifteen-foot berm that divided the beach from the cinderblock sprawl of offices,locker rooms, barracks, and classrooms that is the BUD/S compound plenty oftimes. 

Usually to lie back in the shallows, fully dressed, then roll in the sand—untilwe were covered in sand from head to toe—before charging back to the Grinder, dripping heavy with salt water and sand, which ramped up the degree of difficultyon the pull-up bar. 

That ritual was called getting wet and sandy, and they wantedsand in our ears, up our noses, and in every orifice of our body, but this time wewere on the verge of something called surf torture, which is a special kind of beast. 

As instructed, we charged into the surf screaming like senseis. 

Fully clothed, armslinked, we waded into the impact zone. 

The surf was angry that moonless night,nearly head high, and the waves were rolling thunder that barreled and foamed insets of three and four. 

Cold water shriveled our balls and swiped the breath from ourlungs as the waves thrashed us. 

This was early May, and in the spring the ocean off Coronado ranges from 59–63degrees. 

We bobbed up and down as one, a pearl strand of floating heads scanningthe horizon for any hint of swell we prayed we’d see coming before it towed usunder. 

The surfers in our crew detected doom first and called out the waves so wecould duck dive just in time. 

After ten minutes or so, Psycho ordered us back toland. 

On the verge of hypothermia, we scrambled from the surf zone and stood atattention, while being checked by the doctor for hypothermia. 

That cycle wouldcontinue to repeat itself. 

The sky was smeared orange and red. 

The temperaturedropped sharply as night loomed close. 

“Say goodbye to the sun, gents,” SBG said. 

He made us wave at the setting sun. 

Asymbolic acknowledgement of an inconvenient truth. 

We were about to freeze ournatural asses off. 

After an hour, we fell back into our six-man boat crews, and stood nut to butt,huddling tight to get warm, but it was futile. 

Bones were rattling up and down thatbeach. 

Guys were jackhammering and sniffling, a physical state revealing thequaking conditions of splintering minds, which were just now coming to grips withthe reality that this shit had only just begun. 

Even on the hardest days of First Phase prior to Hell Week, when the sheer volumeof rope climbs and push-ups, pull-ups, and flutter kicks crushes your spirit, you canfind a way out. 

Because you know that no matter how much it sucks, you’ll headhome that night, meet friends for dinner, see a movie, maybe get some pussy, andsleep in your own bed. 

The point is, even on miserable days you can fixate on anescape from hell that’s real. 

Hell Week offers no such love. 

Especially on day one, when an hour in they had usstanding, linking arms, facing the Pacific Ocean, wading in and out of the surf forhours. 

In between we were gifted soft sand sprints to warm up. 

Usually they had uscarry our rigid inflatable boat or a log overhead, but the warmth, if it ever arrived,was always short-lived because every ten minutes they rotated us back into thewater. 

The clock ticked slowly that first night as the cold seeped in, colonizing our marrowso thoroughly the runs stopped doing any good. 

There would be no more bombs, nomore shooting, and very little yelling. 

Instead, an eerie quiet expanded anddeadened our spirit. 

In the ocean, all any of us could hear were the waves goingoverhead, the seawater we accidentally swallowed roiling in our guts, and our ownteeth chattering. 

 When you’re that cold and stressed, the mind cannot comprehend the next 120-plushours. 

Five and a half days without sleep cannot be broken up into small pieces. 

There is no way to systematically attack it, which is why every single person whohas ever tried to become a SEAL has asked himself one simple question during theirfirst dose of surf torture:“Why am I here?”Those innocuous words bubbled up in our spinning minds each time we got suckedunder a monster wave at midnight, when we were already borderline hypothermic. 

Because nobody has to become a SEAL. 

We weren’t fucking drafted. 

Becoming aSEAL is a choice. 

And what that single softball question revealed in the heat ofbattle is that each second we remained in training was also a choice, which madethe entire notion of becoming a SEAL seem like masochism. 

It’s voluntary torture. 

And that makes no sense at all to the rational mind, which is why those four wordsunravel so many men. 

The instructors know all of this, of course, which is why they stop yelling early on. 

Instead, as the night wore on, Psycho Pete consoled us like a concerned olderbrother. 

He offered us hot soup, a warm shower, blankets, and a ride back to thebarracks. 

That was the bait he set for quitters to snap up, and he harvested helmetsleft and right. 

He was taking the souls of those who caved because they couldn’tanswer that simple question. 

I get it. 

When it’s only Sunday and you know you’regoing to Friday and you’re already far colder than you’ve ever been, you’re temptedto believe that you can’t hack it and that nobody can. 

Married guys were thinking, Icould be at home, cuddled up to my beautiful wife instead of shivering andsuffering. 

Single guys were thinking, I could be on the hunt for pussy right now. 

It’s tough to ignore that kind of glittering lure, but this was my second lap throughthe early stages of BUD/S. 

I’d tasted the evil of Hell Week as part of Class 230. 

Ididn’t make it, but I didn’t quit. 

I was pulled out on a medical after contractingdouble pneumonia. 

I defied doctor’s orders three times and tried to stay in the fight,but they eventually forced me to the barracks and rolled me back to day one, weekone of Class 231. 

I wasn’t all the way healed up from that bout of pneumonia when my secondBUD/S class kicked off. 

My lungs were still filled with mucus and each coughshook my chest and sounded like a rake was scraping the inside of my alveoli. 

Still,I liked my chances a lot better this time around because I was prepared, and becauseI was in a boat crew thick with bad motherfuckers. 

BUD/S boat crews are sorted by height because those are the guys who will helpyou carry your boat everywhere you go once Hell Week begins. 

Size alone didn’tguarantee your teammates would be tough, however, and our guys were a crew ofsquare-peg misfits. 

There was me, the exterminator who had to drop 100 pounds and take the ASVABtest twice just to get to SEAL training, only to be rolled back almost immediately. 

We also had the late Chris Kyle. 

You know him as the deadliest sniper in Navyhistory. 

He was so successful, the hajjis in Fallujah put an $80,000 bounty on hishead and he became a living legend among the Marines he protected as a memberof Seal Team Three. 

He won a Silver Star and four Bronze Stars for valor, left the military, and wrote a book, American Sniper, that became a hit movie starringBradley fucking Cooper. 

But back then he was a simple Texas hayseed rodeocowboy who barely said a damn word. 

Then there was Bill Brown, aka Freak Brown. 

Most people just called him Freak,and he hated it because he’d been treated like one his whole damn life. 

In manyways he was the white version of David Goggins. 

He came up tough in the rivertowns of South Jersey. 

Older kids in the neighborhood bullied him because of hiscleft palate or because he was slow in class, which is how that nickname stuck. 

Hegot into enough fights over it that he eventually landed in a youth detention centerfor a six-month stretch. 

By the time he was nineteen he was living on his own in thehood, trying to make ends meet as a gas station attendant. 

It wasn’t working. 

Hehad no coat and no car. 

He commuted everywhere on a rusted out ten-speed bike,literally freezing his balls off. 

One day after work, he stopped into a Navyrecruitment office because he knew he needed structure and purpose, and somewarm clothes. 

They told him about the SEALs, and he was intrigued, but hecouldn’t swim. 

Just like me, he taught himself, and after three attempts he finallypassed the SEAL swim test. 

Next thing he knew, Brown was in BUD/S, where that Freak nickname followedhim. 

He rocked PT and sailed through First Phase, but he wasn’t nearly as solid inthe classroom. 

Navy SEAL dive training is as tough intellectually as it is physically,but he scraped by and got within two weeks of becoming a BUD/S graduate when,in one of his final land warfare evolutions, he failed re-assembling his weapon in atimed evolution known as weapons practical. 

Brown hit his targets but missed thetime, and he flunked out of BUD/S at the bitter end. 

But he didn’t give up. 

No sir, Freak Brown wasn’t going anywhere. 

I’d heard storiesabout him before he washed up with me in Class 231. 

He had two chips on hisshoulders, and I liked him immediately. 

He was hard as hell and exactly the kind ofguy I signed up to go to war with. 

When we carried our boat from the Grinder to thesand for the first time, I made sure we were the two men at the front, where the boatis at its heaviest. 

“Freak Brown,” I shouted, “we will be the pillars of Boat CrewTwo!” He looked over, and I glared back. 

“Don’t fucking call me that, Goggins,” he said with a snarl. 

“Well don’t you move out of position, son! You and me, up front, all fuckingweek!”“Roger that,” he said. 

I took the lead of Boat Crew Two from the beginning, and getting all six of usthrough Hell Week was my singular focus. 

Everyone fell in line because I’d alreadyproven myself, and not just on the Grinder. 

In the days before Hell Week began Igot it into my head that we needed to steal the Hell Week schedule from ourinstructors. 

I told our crew as much one night when we were hanging in theclassroom, which doubled as our lounge. 

My words fell on deaf ears. 

A few guyslaughed but everyone else ignored me and went back to their shallow assconversations. 

 I understood why. 

It made no sense. 

How were we supposed to get a copy of theirshit? And even if we did, wouldn’t the anticipation make it worse? And what if wegot caught? Was the reward worth the risk?I believed it was, because I’d tasted Hell Week. 

Brown and a few other guys hadtoo, and we knew how easy it was to think about quitting when confronted withlevels of pain and exhaustion you didn’t think possible. 

One hundred and thirtyhours of suffering may as well be a thousand when you know you can’t sleep andthat there will be no relief anytime soon. 

And we knew something else too. 

HellWeek was a mind game. 

The instructors used our suffering to pick and peel awayour layers, not to find the fittest athletes. 

To find the strongest minds. 

That’ssomething the quitters didn’t understand until it was too late. 

Everything in life is a mind game! Whenever we get swept under by life’s dramas,large and small, we are forgetting that no matter how bad the pain gets, no matterhow harrowing the torture, all bad things end. 

That forgetting happens the secondwe give control over our emotions and actions to other people, which can easilyhappen when pain is peaking. 

During Hell Week, the men who quit felt like theywere running on a treadmill turned way the fuck up with no dashboard within reach. 

But, whether they ever figured it out or not, that was an illusion they fell for. 

I went into Hell Week knowing I put myself there, that I wanted to be there, andthat I had all the tools I needed to win this fucked-up game, which gave me thepassion to persevere and claim ownership of the experience. 

It allowed me to playhard, bend rules, and look for an edge wherever and whenever I could until the hornsounded on Friday afternoon. 

To me this was war, and the enemies were ourinstructors who’d blatantly told us that they wanted to break us down and make usquit! Having their schedule in our heads would help us whittle the time down bymemorizing what came next, and more than that, it would gift us a victory going in. 

Which would give us something to latch onto during Hell Week when thosemotherfuckers were beating us down. 

“Yo man, I’m not playing,” I said. 

“We need that schedule!”I could see Kenny Bigbee, the only other black man in Class 231, raise an eyebrowfrom across the room. 

He’d been in my first BUD/S class, and got injured justbefore Hell Week. 

Now he was back for seconds too. 

“Oh shit,” he said. 

“DavidGoggins is back on the log. 

”Kenny smiled wide and I doubled over laughing. 

He’d been in the instructors’ officelistening in when the doctors were trying to pull me out of my first Hell Week. 

Itwas during a log PT evolution. 

Our boat crews were carrying logs as a unit up anddown the beach, soaked, salty, and sandy as shit. 

I was running with a log on myshoulders, vomiting blood. 

Bloody snot streamed from my nose and mouth, and theinstructors periodically grabbed me and sat me down nearby because they thought Imight drop fucking dead. 

But every time they turned around I was back in the mix. 

Back on that log. 

Kenny kept hearing the same refrain over the radio that night. 

“We need to getGoggins out of there,” one voice said. 

 “Roger that, sir. 

Goggins is sitting down,” another voice crackled. 

Then after a beat,Kenny would hear that radio chirp again. 

“Oh shit, Goggins is back on the log. 

Irepeat, Goggins is back on the log!”Kenny loved telling that story. 

At 5’10” and 170 pounds, he was smaller than I wasand wasn’t on our boat crew, but I knew we could trust him. 

In fact, there wasnobody better for the job. 

During Class 231, Kenny was tapped to keep theinstructors’ office clean and tidy, which meant that he had access. 

That night, hetiptoed into enemy territory, liberated the schedule from a file, made a copy, andslipped it back into position before anyone ever knew it was missing. 

Just like thatwe had our first victory before the biggest mind game of our lives had even begun. 

Of course, knowing something is coming is only a small part of the battle. 

Becausetorture is torture, and in Hell Week the only way to get to past it is to go through it. 

With a look or a few words, I made sure our guys were putting out at all times. 

When we stood on the beach holding our boat overhead, or running logs up anddown that motherfucker, we went hard, and during surf torture I hummed thesaddest and most epic song from Platoon, while we waded into the Pacific Ocean. 

I’ve always found inspiration in film. 

Rocky helped motivate me to achieve mydream of being invited to SEAL training, but Platoon would help me and my crewfind an edge during the dark nights of Hell Week, when the instructors weremocking our pain, telling us how sorry we were, and sending us into the head-highsurf over and over again. 

Adagio in Strings was the score to one of my favoritescenes in Platoon and with bone-chilling fog wrapping all around us, I stretched myarms out like Elias when he was getting gunned down by the Viet Cong, and sangmy ass off. 

We’d all watched that movie together during First Phase, and my anticshad a dual effect of pissing off the instructors and firing up my crew. 

Findingmoments of laughter in the pain and delirium turned the entire melodramaticexperience upside down for us. 

It gave us some control of our emotions. 

Again, thiswas all a mind game, and I damn sure wasn’t going to lose. 

But the most important games within the game were the races that the instructorsset up between boat crews. 

Damn near everything in BUD/S was a competition. 

We’d run boats and logs up and down the beach. 

We had paddle races, and we evendid the damn O-Course carrying a log or a boat between obstacles. 

We’d carry themwhile balancing on narrow beams, over spinning logs, and across rope bridges. 

We’d send it over the high wall, and we dropped it at the foot of the thirty-foot-highcargo net while we climbed up and over that damn thing. 

The winning team wasalmost always rewarded with rest and the losing teams got extra beat downs fromPsycho Pete. 

They were ordered to perform sets of push-ups and sit-ups in the wetsand, then do berm sprints, their bodies quivering with exhaustion, which felt likefailure on top of failure. 

Psycho let them know it too. 

He laughed in their face as hehunted quitters. 

“You are absolutely pathetic,” he said. 

“I hope to God you fucking quit because ifthey allow you in the field you’re gonna get us all killed!”Watching him berate my classmates gave me a dual sensation. 

I didn’t mind himdoing his job, but he was a bully, and I never liked bullies. 

He’d been coming at mehard since I got back to BUD/S, and early on I decided I would show him that hecouldn’t get to me. 

Between bouts of surf torture, when most guys stand nut to butt to transfer heat, body to body, I stood apart. 

Everyone else was shivering. 

I didn’teven twitch, and I saw how much that bothered him. 

   During Hell WeekThe one luxury we had during Hell Week was chow. 

We ate like kings. 

We’retalking omelets, roast chicken and potatoes, steak, hot soup, pasta with meat sauce,all kinds of fruit, brownies, soda, coffee, and a lot more. 

The catch is we had to runthe mile there and back, with that 200-pound boat on our heads. 

I always left chowhall with a peanut butter sandwich tucked in my wet and sandy pocket to scarf onthe beach when the instructors weren’t looking. 

One day after lunch, Psychodecided to give us a bit more than a mile. 

It became obvious at the quarter milemarker, when he picked up his pace, that he wasn’t taking us directly back to theGrinder. 

“You boys better keep the fuck up!” he yelled, as one boat crew fell back. 

I checkedmy guys. 

 “We are staying on this motherfucker! Fuck him!”“Roger that,” said Freak Brown. 

True to his word, he’d been with me on the front ofthat boat—the two heaviest points—since Sunday night, and he was only gettingstronger. 

Psycho stretched us out on the soft sand for more than four miles. 

He tried like hellto lose us, too, but we were his shadow. 

He switched up the cadence. 

One minute hewas sprinting, then he was crouching down, wide-legged, grabbing his nuts anddoing elephant walks, then he loped at a jogger’s pace before breaking into anotherwind sprint down the beach. 

By then the closest boat was a quarter mile behind, butwe were clipping his damn heels. 

We mimicked his every step and refused to let ourbully gain any satisfaction at our expense. 

He may have smoked everybody else buthe did not smoke Boat Crew Two!Hell Week is the devil’s opera, and it builds like a crescendo, peaking in torment onWednesday and staying right there until they call it on Friday afternoon. 

ByWednesday we were all broke dick, chafed to holy Hell. 

Our whole body was onebig raspberry, oozing puss and blood. 

Mentally we were zombies. 

The instructorshad us doing simple boat raises and we were all dragging. 

Even my crew couldbarely lift that boat. 

Meanwhile, Psycho and SBG and the other instructors keptclose watch, looking for weaknesses as always. 

I had a real hate for the instructors. 

They were my enemy and I was tired of themtrying to burrow into my brain. 

I glanced at Brown, and for the first time all weekhe looked shaky. 

The whole crew did. 

Shit, I felt miserable too. 

My knee was thesize of a grapefruit and every step I took torched my nerves, which is why I wassearching for something to fuel me. 

I locked in on Psycho Pete. 

I was sick of thatmotherfucker. 

The instructors looked composed and comfortable. 

We weredesperate, and they had what we needed: energy! It was time to flip the game andown real estate in their heads. 

When they clocked out that night and drove home after a pussy-ass eight hour shiftwhile we were still going hard, I wanted them thinking about Boat Crew Two. 

Iwanted to haunt them when they slipped into bed with their wives. 

I wanted tooccupy so much space in their minds that they couldn’t even get it up. 

To me thatwould be as powerful as putting a knife in their dick. 

So I deployed a process that Inow call “Taking Souls. 

”I turned to Brown. 

“You know why I call you Freak?” I asked. 

He looked over aswe lowered the boat, then lifted it up overhead like creaky robots on reserve batterypower. 

“Because you are one of the baddest men I’ve ever seen in my damn life!”He cracked a smile. 

“And you know what I say to these motherfuckers right here?”I tipped my elbow at the nine instructors gathered on the beach, drinking coffee andtalking bullshit. 

“I say, they can go fuck themselves!” Bill nodded and narrowed hiseyes on our tormentors, while I turned to the rest of the crew. 

“Now let’s throw thisshit up high and show them who we are!”“Fucking beautiful,” Bill said. 

“Let’s do it!”Within seconds my whole team had life. 

We didn’t just lift the boat overhead andset it down hard, we threw it up, caught it overhead, tapped the sand with it and threw it up high again. 

The results were immediate and undeniable. 

Our pain andexhaustion faded. 

Each rep made us stronger and faster, and each time we threw theboat up we all chanted. 

“YOU CAN’T HURT BOAT CREW TWO!”That was our fuck you to the instructors, and we had their full attention as we soaredon a second wind. 

On the toughest day of the hardest week in the world’s toughesttraining, Boat Crew Two was moving at lightning speed and making a mockery ofHell Week. 

The look on the instructors’ faces told a story. 

Their mouths hung openlike they were witnessing something nobody had ever seen before. 

Some avertedtheir eyes, almost embarrassed. 

Only SBG looked satisfied. 

***Since that night in Hell Week, I’ve deployed the Taking Souls concept countlesstimes. 

Taking Souls is a ticket to finding your own reserve power and riding asecond wind. 

It’s the tool you can call upon to win any competition or overcomeevery life obstacle. 

You can utilize it to win a chess match, or conquer an adversaryin a game of office politics. 

It can help you rock a job interview or excel at school. 

And yes, it can be used to conquer all manner of physical challenges, but remember,this is a game you are playing within yourself. 

Unless you’re engaged in physicalcompetition, I’m not suggesting that you try to dominate someone or crush theirspirit. 

In fact, they never even need to know you’re playing this game. 

This is atactic for you to be your best when duty calls. 

It’s a mind game you’re playing onyourself. 

Taking someone’s soul means you’ve gained a tactical advantage. 

Life is all aboutlooking for tactical advantages, which is why we stole the Hell Week schedule, whywe nipped Psycho’s heels on that run, and why I made a show of myself in the surf,humming the Platoon theme song. 

Each of those incidents was an act of defiancethat empowered us. 

But defiance isn’t always the best way to take someone’s soul. 

It all depends uponyour terrain. 

During BUD/S, the instructors didn’t mind if you looked foradvantages like that. 

They respected it as long as you were also kicking ass. 

Youmust do your own homework. 

Know the terrain you’re operating in, when andwhere you can push boundaries, and when you should fall in line. 

Next, take inventory of your mind and body on the eve of battle. 

List out yourinsecurities and weakness, as well as your opponent’s. 

For instance, if you’regetting bullied, and you know where you fall short or feel insecure, you can stayahead of any insults or barbs a bully may throw your way. 

You can laugh at yourselfalong with them, which disempowers them. 

If you take what they do or say lesspersonally, they no longer hold any cards. 

Feelings are just feelings. 

On the otherhand, people who are secure with themselves don’t bully other people. 

They lookout for other people, so if you’re getting bullied you know that you’re dealing withsomeone who has problem areas you can exploit or soothe. 

Sometimes the best wayto defeat a bully is to actually help them. 

If you can think two or three moves ahead,you will commandeer their thought process, and if you do that, you’ve taken theirdamn soul without them even realizing it. 

 Our SEAL instructors were our bullies, and they didn’t realize the games I wasplaying during that week to keep Boat Crew Two sharp. 

And they didn’t have to. 

Iimagined that they were obsessed with our exploits during Hell Week, but I don’tknow that for sure. 

It was a ploy I used to maintain my mental edge and help ourcrew prevail. 

In the same way, if you are up against a competitor for a promotion, and you knowwhere you fall short, you can shape up your game ahead of your interview orevaluation. 

In that scenario, laughing at your weaknesses won’t solve the problem. 

You must master them. 

In the meantime, if you are aware of your competitor’svulnerabilities you can spin those to your advantage, but all of that takes research. 

Again, know the terrain, know yourself, and you’d better know your adversary indetail. 

Once you’re in the heat of battle, it comes down to staying power. 

If it’s a difficultphysical challenge you will probably have to defeat your own demons before youcan take your opponent’s soul. 

That means rehearsing answers to the simplequestion that is sure to rise up like a thought bubble: “Why am I here?” If you knowthat moment is coming and have your answer ready, you will be equipped to makethe split second-decision to ignore your weakened mind and keep moving. 

Knowwhy you’re in the fight to stay in the fight!And never forget that all emotional and physical anguish is finite! It all endseventually. 

Smile at pain and watch it fade for at least a second or two. 

If you cando that, you can string those seconds together and last longer than your opponentthinks you can, and that may be enough to catch a second wind. 

There is noscientific consensus on second wind. 

Some scientists think it’s the result ofendorphins flooding your nervous system, others think it’s a burst of oxygen thatcan help break down lactic acid, as well as the glycogen and triglycerides musclesneed to perform. 

Some say its purely psychological. 

All I know is that by goinghard when we felt defeated we were able to ride a second wind through the worstnight in Hell Week. 

And once you have that second wind behind you it’s easy tobreak your opponent down and snatch a soul. 

The hard part is getting to that point,because the ticket to victory often comes down to bringing your very best when youfeel your worst. 

***After rocking boat presses, the whole class was gifted an hour of sleep in a biggreen army tent they’d set up on the beach and outfitted with military cots. 

Thosemotherfuckers had no mattresses, but may as well have been a cotton topped cloudof luxury because once we were horizontal we all went limp. 

Oh, but Psycho wasn’t done with me. 

He let me sleep for a solitary minute, thenwoke me up and led me back onto the beach for some one-on-one time. 

He saw anopportunity to get in my head, at last, and I was disoriented as I staggered towardthe water all alone, but the cold woke me the fuck up. 

I decided to savor my extrahour of private surf torture. 

When the water was chest high I began hummingAdagio in Strings once more. 

Louder this time. 

Loud enough for that motherfuckerto hear me over the crash of the surf. 

That song gave me life! I’d come to SEAL training to see if I was hard enough to belong and found an innerbeast within that I never knew existed. 

A beast that I would tap into from then onwhenever life went wrong. 

By the time I emerged from that ocean, I consideredmyself unbreakable. 

If only. 

Hell Week takes its toll on everybody, and later that night, with forty-eight hours togo, I went to med check to get a Toradol shot in my knee to bring the swellingdown. 

By the time I was back on the beach, the boat crews were out at sea in themidst of a paddling drill. 

The surf was pounding, the wind swirling. 

Psycho lookedover at SBG. 

“What the fuck are we gonna do with him?”For the first time, he was hesitant, and tired of trying to beat me down. 

I was goodto go, ready for any challenge, but Psycho was over it. 

He was ready to give my assa spa vacation. 

That’s when I knew I’d outlasted him; that I had his soul. 

SBG hadother ideas. 

He handed me a life jacket and attached a chem light to the back of myhat. 

“Follow me,” he said as he charged up the beach. 

I caught up and we ran north for agood mile. 

By then we could barely see the boats and their bobbing lights throughthe mist and over the waves. 

“All right, Goggins. 

Now go swim out and find yourfucking boat!”He’d landed a hollow point on my deepest insecurity, pierced my confidence, and Iwas stunned silent. 

I gave him a look that said, “Are you fucking kidding me?” Iwas a decent swimmer by then, and surf torture didn’t scare me because we weren’tthat far from shore, but an open water, hypothermic swim a thousand yards offshore in a storm, to a boat that had no fucking idea I was heading their way? Thatsounded like a death sentence, and I hadn’t prepared for anything like it. 

Butsometimes the unexpected descends like chaos, and without warning even thebravest among us must be ready to take on risks and tasks that seem beyond ourcapabilities. 

For me, in that moment, it came down to how I wanted to be remembered. 

I couldhave refused the order, and I wouldn’t have gotten in trouble because I had no swimbuddy (in SEAL training you always have to be with a swim buddy), and it wasobvious that he was asking me to do something that was extremely unsafe. 

But Ialso knew that my objective coming into SEAL training was more than making itthrough to the other side with a Trident. 

For me it was the opportunity to go upagainst the best of the best and distance myself from the pack. 

So even though Icouldn’t see the boats out past the thrashing waves there was no time to dwell onfear. 

There was no choice to make at all. 

“What are you waiting on Goggins? Get your fucking ass out there, and do not fuckthis up!”“Roger that!” I shouted and sprinted into the surf. 

Trouble was, strapped with abuoyancy vest, nursing a wounded knee, wearing boots, I couldn’t swim for shitand it was almost impossible to duck dive through the waves. 

I had to flail over thewhite wash, and with my mind managing so many variables, the ocean seemedcolder than ever. 

I swallowed water by the gallon. 

It was as if the sea was prying open my jaws and flooding my system, and with each gulp, my fear magnified. 

I had no idea that back on land, SBG was preparing for a worst-case scenariorescue. 

I didn’t know he’d never put another man in that position before. 

I didn’trealize that he saw something special in me and like any strong leader wanted to seehow far I could take it, as he watched my light bob on the surface, nervous as hell. 

He told me all of that during a recent conversation. 

At the time I was just trying tosurvive. 

I finally made it through the surf and swam another half-mile off-shore only torealize I had six boats bearing down on my head, teeter tottering in and out of viewthanks to a four-foot wind swell. 

They didn’t know I was there! My light was faint,and in the trench I couldn’t see a damn thing. 

I kept waiting for one of them tocome barreling down from the peak of a swell and mow me the fuck down. 

All Icould do was bark into the darkness like a hoarse sea lion. 

“Boat Crew Two! Boat Crew Two!”It was a minor miracle that my guys heard me. 

They wheeled our boat around, andFreak Brown grabbed me with his big ass hooks and hauled me in like a prizedcatch. 

I lay back in the middle of the boat, my eyes closed, and jackhammered forthe first time all week. 

I was so cold I couldn’t hide it. 

“Damn, Goggins,” Brown said, “you must be insane! You okay?” I nodded onceand got a hold of myself. 

I was the leader of that crew and couldn’t allow myself toshow weakness. 

I tensed every muscle in my body, and my shiver slowed to a stopin real time. 

“That’s how you lead from the motherfucking front,” I said, coughing up saltwaterlike a wounded bird. 

I couldn’t keep a straight face for long. 

Neither could my crew. 

They knew damn well that crazy-ass swim wasn’t my idea. 

As the clock ran down on Hell Week, we were in the demo pit, just off Coronado’sfamous Silver Strand. 

The pit was filled with cold mud and topped off with icywater. 

There was a rope bridge—two separate lines, one for the feet and one for thehands—stretching across it from end to end. 

One by one, each man had to navigatetheir way across while the instructors shook the shit out of it, trying to make us fall. 

To maintain that kind of balance takes tremendous core strength, and we were allcooked and at our wits end. 

Plus, my knee was still fucked. 

In fact, it had gottenworse and required a pain shot every twelve hours. 

But when my name was called, Iclimbed onto that rope, and when the instructors went to work, I flexed my core andheld on with all I had left. 

Nine months earlier, I had topped out at 297 pounds and couldn’t even run a quartermile. 

Back then, when I was dreaming of a different life, I remember thinking thatjust getting through Hell Week would be the biggest honor of my life so far. 

Even ifI never graduated from BUD/S, surviving Hell Week alone would have meantsomething. 

But I didn’t just survive. 

I was about to finish Hell Week at the top ofmy class, and for the first time, I knew I was a bad motherfucker. 

Once, I was so focused on failing, I was afraid to even try. 

Now I would take on anychallenge. 

All my life, I was terrified of water, and especially cold water, but standing there in the final hour, I wished the ocean, wind, and mud were evencolder! I was completely transformed physically, which was a big part of mysuccess in BUD/S, but what saw me through Hell Week was my mind, and I wasjust starting to tap into its power. 

That’s what I was thinking about as the instructors did their best to throw me offthat rope bridge like a mechanical bull. 

I hung tough and got as far as anyone else inClass 231 before nature won out and I was sent spinning into the freezing mud. 

Iwiped it from my eyes and mouth and laughed like mad as Freak Brown helped meup. 

Not long after that, SBG stepped to the edge of the pit. 

“Hell Week secure!” He shouted to the thirty guys still left, quivering in theshallows. 

All of us chafed and bleeding, bloated and stiff. 

“You guys did anamazing job!”Some guys screamed with joy. 

Others collapsed to their knees with tears in theireyes and thanked God. 

I stared into the heavens too, pulled Freak Brown in for ahug, and high-fived my team. 

Every other boat crew had lost men, but not BoatCrew Two! We lost no men and won every single race!We continued to celebrate as we boarded a bus to the Grinder. 

Once we arrived,there was a large pizza for each guy along with a sixty-four-ounce bottle ofGatorade and the coveted brown t-shirt. 

That pizza tasted like motherfucking mannafrom heaven, but the shirts meant something more significant. 

When you first arriveat BUD/S you wear white t-shirts every day. 

Once you survive Hell Week, you getto swap them out for brown shirts. 

It was a symbol that we’d advanced to a higherlevel, and after a lifetime of mostly failure, I definitely felt like I was someplacenew. 

I tried to enjoy the moment like everyone else, but my knee hadn’t felt right in twodays and I decided to leave and see the medics. 

On my way off the Grinder, Ilooked to my right and saw nearly a hundred helmets lined up. 

They belonged to themen who’d rung the bell, and they stretched past the statue, all the way to thequarterdeck. 

I read some of the names—guys who I liked. 

I knew how they feltbecause I was there when my Pararescue class graduated without me. 

That memoryhad dominated me for years, but after 130 hours of Hell, it no longer defined me. 

Every man was required to see the medics that evening, but our bodies were soswollen they had a hard time discerning injuries from general soreness. 

All I knewwas my right knee was thrice fucked and I needed crutches to get around. 

FreakBrown left med check bruised and battered. 

Kenny came out clean and barelylimped, but he was plenty sore. 

Thankfully, our next evolution was walk week. 

Wehad seven days to eat, drink, and heal up before shit got real once again. 

It wasn’tmuch, but enough time for most of the insane motherfuckers that managed toremain in Class 231 to get well. 

Me, on the other hand? My swollen knee hadn’t gotten any better by the time theysnatched my crutches away. 

But there was no time for boo-hoo-ing. 

First Phase funwasn’t over yet. 

After walk week came knot tying, which may not sound like muchbut was way worse than I expected because that particular drill took place at thebottom of the pool, where those same instructors would do their best to drown myone-legged ass. 

 It was as if the Devil had been watching the whole show, waited out intermission,and now his favorite part was coming right up. 

The night before BUD/S kickedback up in intensity I could hear his words ringing in my stressed-out brain as Itossed and turned all night long. 

They say you like suffering, Goggins. 

That you think you’re a bad motherfucker. 

Enjoy your extended stay in Hell!    OceanofPDF. 

com  CHALLENGE #4Choose any competitive situation that you’re in right now. 

Who is your opponent?Is it your teacher or coach, your boss, an unruly client? No matter how they’retreating you there is one way to not only earn their respect, but turn the tables. 

Excellence. 

That may mean acing an exam, or crafting an ideal proposal, or smashing a salesgoal. 

Whatever it is, I want you to work harder on that project or in that class thanyou ever have before. 

Do everything exactly as they ask, and whatever standardthey set as an ideal outcome, you should be aiming to surpass that. 

If your coach doesn’t give you time in the games, dominate practice. 

Check the bestguy on your squad and show the fuck out. 

That means putting time in off the field. 

Watching film so you can study your opponent’s tendencies, memorizing plays, andtraining in the gym. 

You need to make that coach pay attention. 

If it’s your teacher, then start doing work of high quality. 

Spend extra time on yourassignments. 

Write papers for her that she didn’t even assign! Come early to class. 

Ask questions. 

Pay attention. 

Show her who you are and want to be. 

If it’s a boss, work around the clock. 

Get to work before them. 

Leave after they gohome. 

Make sure they see that shit, and when it’s time to deliver, surpass theirmaximum expectations. 

Whoever you’re dealing with, your goal is to make them watch you achieve whatthey could never have done themselves. 

You want them thinking how amazing youare. 

Take their negativity and use it to dominate their task with everything you’vegot. 

Take their motherfucking soul! Afterward, post about it on social and add thehashtag #canthurtme #takingsouls. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com   CHAPTER FIVE    5. 

ARMORED MIND“Your knee looks pretty bad, Goggins. 

”No fucking shit, doc. 

With two days to go in walk week, I’d come by medical for afollow-up. 

The doctor rolled up my camo pants and when he gave my right kneecapa gentle squeeze, pain seized my brain, but I couldn’t show it. 

I was playing a role. 

Iwas the beat up but otherwise healthy BUD/S student ready for the fight, and Icouldn’t so much as grimace to pull it off. 

I already knew the knee was fucked, andthat the odds of getting through another five months of training on one leg werelow, but accepting another roll back meant enduring another Hell Week, and thatwas way too much to process. 

“The swelling hasn’t gone down much. 

How’s it feel?”The doctor was playing a role too. 

SEAL candidates had a don’t ask, don’t tellagreement with most of the medical staff at Naval Special Warfare Command. 

Iwasn’t about to make the doctor’s job easier by revealing anything to him, and hewasn’t gonna take caution’s side and pull the rip cord on a man’s dream. 

He liftedhis hand and my pain faded. 

I coughed and pneumonia once again rattled in mylungs until I felt the cold truth of his stethoscope on my skin. 

Ever since Hell Week was called, I’d been coughing up brown knots of mucus. 

Forthe first two days I lay in bed, day and night, spitting them into a Gatorade bottle,where I stored them like so many nickels. 

I could barely breathe, and couldn’t movemuch either. 

I may have been a bad motherfucker in Hell Week, but that shit wasover, and I had to deal with the fact that the Devil (and those instructors) brandedme too. 

“It’s all right, doc,” I said. 

“A little stiff is all. 

”Time is what I needed. 

I knew how to push through pain, and my body had almostalways responded with performance. 

I wasn’t going to quit just because my kneewas barking. 

It would come around eventually. 

The doc prescribed medicine toreduce the congestion in my lungs and sinuses, and gave me some Motrin for myknee. 

Within two days my breathing improved, but I still couldn’t bend my rightleg. 

This would be a problem. 

Of all the moments in BUD/S that I thought could break me, a knot-tying exercisenever registered on my radar. 

Then again, this wasn’t the fucking Boy Scouts. 

Thiswas an underwater knot-tying drill held in the fifteen-foot section of the pool. 

And while the pool didn’t strike mortal fear into me like it once did, being negativelybuoyant, I knew that any pool evolution could be my undoing, especially those thatdemanded treading water. 

Even before Hell Week, we’d been tested in the pool. 

We had to perform mockrescues on the instructors and do a fifty-meter underwater swim without fins on asingle breath. 

That swim started with a giant stride into the water followed by a fullsomersault to siphon off any momentum whatsoever. 

Then without kicking off theside, we swam along the lane lines to the end of our twenty-five-meter pool. 

On thefar side we were allowed to kick off the wall then swim back. 

When I arrived at thefifty-meter mark I rose up and gasped for air. 

My heart hammered until my breathsmoothed, and I grasped that I’d actually passed the first of a series of complicatedunderwater evolutions that were supposed to teach us to be calm, cool, andcollected underwater on a breath hold. 

The knot-tying evolution was next in the series and it wasn’t about our ability to tievarious knots or a way to time our max breath hold. 

Sure, both skills come in handyon amphibian operations, but this drill was more about our capacity to jugglemultiple stressors in an environment that’s not sustainable for human life. 

Despitemy health, I was heading into the drill with some confidence. 

Things changed whenI started treading water. 

That’s how the drill began, with eight students strung out across the pool, movingour hands and legs like egg beaters. 

That’s hard enough for me on two good legs,but because my right knee didn’t work, I was forced to tread water with just my left. 

That spiked the degree of difficulty, and my heart rate, which sapped my energy. 

Each student had an instructor assigned to them for this evolution and Psycho Petespecifically requested me. 

It was obvious I was struggling, and Psycho, and hisbruised pride, were hungry for a little payback. 

With each revolution of my rightleg, shockwaves of pain exploded like fireworks. 

Even with Psycho eyeballing me,I couldn’t hide it. 

When I grimaced, he smiled like a kid on Christmas morning. 

“Tie a square knot! Then a bowline!” He shouted. 

I was working so hard it wasdifficult to catch my breath, but Psycho didn’t give two fucks. 

“Now, dammit!” Igulped air, bent from the waist and kicked down. 

There were five knots in the drill altogether and each student was told to grab theireight-inch slice of rope, and tie them off one at a time at the bottom of the pool. 

Wewere allotted a breath in between, but could do as many as all five knots on a singlebreath. 

The instructor called out the knots, but the pacing was up to each student. 

We weren’t allowed to use a mask or goggles to complete the evolution, and theinstructor had to approve each knot with a thumbs up before we were permitted tosurface. 

If they flashed a thumb down instead, we had to re-tie that knot correctly,and if we surfaced before a given knot was approved, that meant failure and aticket home. 

Once back at the surface, there was no resting or relaxing between tasks. 

Treadingwater was the constant refrain, which meant soaring heart rates and the continualburning up of oxygen in the bloodstream for the one-legged man. 

Translation: thedives were uncomfortable as hell, and blacking out was a real possibility. 

 Psycho glared at me through his mask as I worked my knots. 

After about thirtyseconds he’d approved both and we surfaced. 

He breathed free and easy, but I wasgasping and panting like a wet, tired dog. 

The pain in my knee was so bad I feltsweat bead up on my forehead. 

When you’re sweating in an unheated pool, youknow shit’s fucked up. 

I was breathless, low on energy, and wanted to quit, butquitting this evolution meant quitting BUD/S altogether, and that wasn’t happening. 

“Oh no, are you hurt, Goggins? Do you have some sand in your pussy?” Psychoasked. 

“I’ll bet you can’t do the last three knots on one breath. 

”He said it with a smirk, like he was daring me. 

I knew the rules. 

I didn’t have toaccept his challenge, but that would have made Psycho just a little too happy and Icouldn’t allow that. 

I nodded and kept treading water, delaying my dive until mypulse evened out and I could score one deep, nourishing breath. 

Psycho wasn’thaving it. 

Whenever I opened my mouth he splashed water in my face to stress meout even more, a tactic used when trainees started to panic. 

That made breathingimpossible. 

“Go under now or you fail!”I’d run out of time. 

I tried to gulp some air before my duck dive, and tasted amouthful of Psycho’s splash water instead as I dove to the bottom of the pool on anegative breath hold. 

My lungs were damn near empty which meant I was in painfrom the jump, but I knocked the first one out in a few seconds. 

Psycho took hissweet time examining my work. 

My heart was thrumming like high alert Morsecode. 

I felt it flip flop in my chest, like it was trying to break through my rib cageand fly to freedom. 

Psycho stared at the twine, flipped it over and perused it withhis eyes and fingers, before offering a thumb’s up in slow motion. 

I shook my head,untied the rope and hit the next one. 

Again he gave it a close inspection while mychest burned and diaphragm contracted, trying to force air into my empty lungs. 

The pain level in my knee was at a ten. 

Stars gathered in my peripheral vision. 

Those multiple stressors had me teetering like a Jenga tower, and I felt like I wasabout to black out. 

If that happened, I’d have to depend on Psycho to swim me tothe surface and bring me around. 

Did I really trust this man to do that? He hated me. 

What if he failed to execute? What if my body was too burned-out that even arescue breath couldn’t rouse me?My mind was spun with those simple toxic questions that never go away. 

Why wasI here? Why suffer when I could quit and be comfortable again? Why risk passingout or even death for a fucking knot drill? I knew that if I succumbed and bolted tothe surface my SEAL career would have ended then and there, but in that moment Icouldn’t figure out why I ever gave a fuck. 

I looked over at Psycho. 

He held both thumbs up and sported a big goofy smile onhis face like he was watching a damn comedy show. 

His split second of pleasure inmy pain, reminded me of all the bullying and taunts I felt as a teenager, but insteadof playing the victim and letting negative emotions sap my energy and force me tothe surface, a failure, it was as if a new light blazed in my brain that allowed me toflip the script. 

Time stood still as I realized for the first time that I’d always looked at my entirelife, everything I’d been through, from the wrong perspective. 

Yes, all the abuse I’d experienced and the negativity I had to push through challenged me to the core, butin that moment I stopped seeing myself as the victim of bad circumstance, and sawmy life as the ultimate training ground instead. 

My disadvantages had beencallousing my mind all along and had prepared me for that moment in that poolwith Psycho Pete. 

I remember my very first day in the gym back in Indiana. 

My palms were soft andquickly got torn up on the bars because they weren’t accustomed to gripping steel. 

But over time, after thousands of reps, my palms built up a thick callous asprotection. 

The same principle works when it comes to mindset. 

Until youexperience hardships like abuse and bullying, failures and disappointments, yourmind will remain soft and exposed. 

Life experience, especially negativeexperiences, help callous the mind. 

But it’s up to you where that callous lines up. 

Ifyou choose to see yourself as a victim of circumstance into adulthood, that callouswill become resentment that protects you from the unfamiliar. 

It will make you toocautious and untrusting, and possibly too angry at the world. 

It will make youfearful of change and hard to reach, but not hard of mind. 

That’s where I was as ateenager, but after my second Hell Week, I’d become someone new. 

I’d foughtthrough so many horrible situations by then and remained open and ready for more. 

My ability to stay open represented a willingness to fight for my own life, whichallowed me to withstand hail storms of pain and use it to callous over my victim’smentality. 

That shit was gone, buried under layers of sweat and hard fucking flesh,and I was starting to callous over my fears too. 

That realization gave me the mentaledge I needed to outlast Psycho Pete one more time. 

To show him he couldn’t hurt me anymore I smiled back, and the feeling of beingon the edge of a blackout went away. 

Suddenly, I was energized. 

The pain faded andI felt like I could stay under all day. 

Psycho saw that in my eyes. 

I tied off the lastknot at leisurely pace, glaring at him the whole time. 

He gestured with his hands forme to hurry up as his diaphragm contracted. 

I finally finished, he gave me a quickaffirmative and kicked to the surface, desperate for a breath. 

I took my time, joinedhim topside and found him gasping, while I felt strangely relaxed. 

When the chipswere down at the pool during Air Force pararescue training, I’d buckled. 

This time Iwon a major battle in the water. 

It was a big victory, but the war wasn’t over. 

After I passed the knot-tying evolution, we had two minutes to climb out on to thedeck, get dressed, and head back to the classroom. 

During First Phase, that’s usuallyplenty of time, but a lot of us—not just me—were still healing from Hell Week andnot moving at our typical lightning pace. 

On top of that, once we got through HellWeek, Class 231 went through a bit of an attitude adjustment. 

Hell Week is designed to show you that a human is capable of much more than youknow. 

It opens your mind to the true possibilities of human potential, and with thatcomes a change in your mentality. 

You no longer fear cold water or doing push-upsall day. 

You realize that no matter what they do to you, they will never break you, soyou don’t rush as much to make their arbitrary deadlines. 

You know if you don’tmake it, the instructors will beat you down. 

Meaning push-ups, getting wet andsandy, anything to up the pain and discomfort quotient, but for those of us knuckledraggers still in the mix, our attitude was, So the fuck be it! None of us feared theinstructors anymore, and we weren’t about to rush. 

They didn’t like that one damnbit. 

 I had seen a lot of beat downs while at BUD/S, but the one we received that daywill go down as one of the worst in history. 

We did push-ups until we couldn’t pickourselves up off the deck, then they turned us on our backs and demanded flutterkicks. 

Each kick was torture for me. 

I kept putting my legs down because of thepain. 

I was showing weakness and if you show weakness, IT IS ON!Psycho and SBG descended and took turns on me. 

I went from push-ups to flutterkicks to bear crawls until they got tired. 

I could feel the moving parts of my kneeshifting, floating, and grabbing every time I bent it to do those bear crawls, and itwas agonizing. 

I moved slower than normal and knew I was broken. 

That simplequestion bubbled up again. 

Why? What was I trying to prove? Quitting seemed thesane choice. 

The comfort of mediocrity sounded like sweet relief until Psychoscreamed in my ear. 

“Move faster, motherfucker!”Once again, an amazing feeling washed over me. 

I wasn’t focused on outdoing himthis time. 

I was in the worst pain of my life, but my victory in the pool minutesbefore came rushing back. 

I’d finally proved to myself that I was a decent enoughwaterman to belong in the Navy SEALs. 

Heady stuff for a negatively buoyant kidthat never took a swim lesson in his entire life. 

And the reason I got there wasbecause I’d put in the work. 

The pool had been my kryptonite. 

Even though I was afar better swimmer as a SEAL candidate, I was still so stressed about waterevolutions that I used to hit the pool after a day of training at least three times aweek. 

I scaled the fifteen-foot fence just to gain after-hours access. 

Other than theacademic aspect, nothing scared me as much about the prospects of BUD/S like theswimming drills, and by dedicating time I was able to callous over that fear and hitnew levels underwater when the pressure was on. 

I thought about the incredible power of a calloused mind on task, as Psycho andSBG beat me down, and that thought became a feeling that took over my body andmade me move as fast as a bear around that pool. 

I couldn’t believe what I wasdoing. 

The intense pain was gone, and so were those nagging questions. 

I wasputting out harder than ever, breaking through the limitations of injury and paintolerance, and riding a second wind delivered by a calloused mind. 

After the bear crawls, I went back to doing flutter kicks, and I still had no pain! Aswe were leaving the pool a half-hour later, SBG asked, “Goggins, what got intoyour ass to make you Superman?” I just smiled and left the pool. 

I didn’t want tosay anything because I didn’t yet understand what I now know. 

Similar to using an opponent’s energy to gain an advantage, leaning on yourcalloused mind in the heat of battle can shift your thinking as well. 

Rememberingwhat you’ve been through and how that has strengthened your mindset can lift youout of a negative brain loop and help you bypass those weak, one-second impulsesto give in so you can power through obstacles. 

And when you leverage a callousedmind like I did around the pool that day and keep fighting through pain, it can helpyou push your limits because if you accept the pain as a natural process and refuseto give in and give up, you will engage the sympathetic nervous system which shiftsyour hormonal flow. 

 The sympathetic nervous system is your fight or flight reflex. 

It’s bubbling justbelow the surface, and when you are lost, stressed out, or struggling, like I waswhen I was a down and out kid, that’s the part of your mind that’s driving the bus. 

We’ve all tasted this feeling before. 

Those mornings when going on a run is the lastthing you want to do, but then twenty minutes into it you feel energized, that’s thework of the sympathetic nervous system. 

What I’ve found is that you can tap into iton-call as long as you know how to manage your own mind. 

When you indulge in negative self-talk, the gifts of a sympathetic response willremain out of reach. 

However, if you can manage those moments of pain that comewith maximum effort, by remembering what you’ve been through to get to thatpoint in your life, you will be in a better position to persevere and choose fight overflight. 

That will allow you to use the adrenaline that comes with a sympatheticresponse to go even harder. 

Obstacles at work and school can also be overcome with your calloused mind. 

Inthose cases, pushing through a given flashpoint isn’t likely to lead to a sympatheticresponse, but it will keep you motivated to push through any doubt you feel aboutyour own abilities. 

No matter the task at hand, there is always opportunity for self-doubt. 

Whenever you decide to follow a dream or set a goal, you are just as likely tocome up with all the reasons why the likelihood of success is low. 

Blame it on thefucked-up evolutionary wiring of the human mind. 

But you don’t have to let yourdoubt into the cockpit! You can tolerate doubt as a backseat driver, but if you putdoubt in the pilot’s seat, defeat is guaranteed. 

Remembering that you’ve beenthrough difficulties before and have always survived to fight again shifts theconversation in your head. 

It will allow you to control and manage doubt, and keepyou focused on taking each and every step necessary to achieve the task at hand. 

Sounds simple, right? It isn’t. 

Very few people even bother to try to control the waytheir thoughts and doubts bubble up. 

The vast majority of us are slaves to ourminds. 

Most don’t even make the first effort when it comes to mastering theirthought process because it’s a never-ending chore and impossible to get right everytime. 

The average person thinks 2,000–3,000 thoughts per hour. 

That’s thirty to fiftyper minute! Some of those shots will slip by the goalie. 

It’s inevitable. 

Especially ifyou coast through life. 

Physical training is the perfect crucible to learn how to manage your thoughtprocess because when you’re working out, your focus is more likely to be singlepointed, and your response to stress and pain is immediate and measurable. 

Do youhammer hard and snag that personal best like you said you would, or do youcrumble? That decision rarely comes down to physical ability, it’s almost always atest of how well you are managing your own mind. 

If you push yourself througheach split and use that energy to maintain a strong pace, you have a great chance ofrecording a faster time. 

Granted, some days it’s easier to do that than others. 

Andthe clock, or the score, doesn’t matter anyway. 

The reason it’s important to pushhardest when you want to quit the most is because it helps you callous your mind. 

It’s the same reason why you have to do your best work when you are the leastmotivated. 

That’s why I loved PT in BUD/S and why I still love it today. 

Physicalchallenges strengthen my mind so I’m ready for whatever life throws at me, and itwill do the same for you. 

 But no matter how well you deploy it, a calloused mind can’t heal broken bones. 

Onthe mile-long hike back to the BUD/S compound, the feeling of victory evaporated,and I could feel the damage I’d done. 

I had twenty weeks of training in front of me,dozens of evolutions ahead, and I could barely walk. 

While I wanted to deny thepain in my knee, I knew I was fucked so I limped straight to medical. 

When he saw my knee, the doc didn’t say a damn thing. 

He just shook his head andsent me to get an x-ray that revealed a fractured kneecap. 

In BUD/S when reservistssustain injuries that take a long time to heal, they’re sent home, and that’s whathappened to me. 

I crutched my ass back to the barracks, demoralized, and while checking out, I sawsome of the guys that quit during Hell Week. 

When I first glimpsed their helmetslined up beneath the bell, I felt sorry for them because I knew the empty feeling ofgiving up, but seeing them face to face reminded me that failure is a part of life andnow we all had to press on. 

I hadn’t quit, so I knew I’d be invited back, but I had no idea if that meant a thirdHell Week or not. 

Or if after getting rolled twice I still had the burning desire tofight through another hurricane of pain with no guarantee of success. 

Given myinjury record, how could I? I left the BUD/S compound with more self awarenessand more mastery over my mind than I’d ever had before, but my future was just asuncertain. 

***Airplanes have always made me claustrophobic, so I decided to take the train fromSan Diego to Chicago, which gave me three full days to think, and my mind was allfucked up. 

On the first day I didn’t know if I wanted to be a SEAL anymore. 

I hadovercome a lot. 

I beat Hell Week, realized the power of a calloused mind andconquered my fear of the water. 

Perhaps I’d already learned enough about myself?What else did I need to prove? On day two I thought about all the other jobs I couldsign up for. 

Maybe I should move on and become a firefighter? That’s a bad-ass job,and it would be an opportunity to become a different sort of hero. 

But on day three,as the train veered into Chicago, I slipped into a bathroom the size of a phone boothand checked in with the Accountability Mirror. 

Is that really how you feel? Are yousure you’re ready to give up on the SEALs and become a civilian fireman? I staredat myself for five minutes before I shook my head. 

I couldn’t lie. 

I had to tell myselfthe truth, out loud. 

“I’m afraid. 

I’m afraid of going through all of that shit again. 

I’m afraid of day one,week one. 

”I was divorced by then, but my ex-wife, Pam, met me at the train station to drive mehome to my mother’s place in Indianapolis. 

Pam was still living in Brazil. 

We’dbeen in touch while I was in San Diego, and after seeing each other through thecrowd on the train platform, we fell back on our habits, and later that night we fellinto bed. 

That whole summer, from May to November, I stayed in the Midwest, healing upthen rehabbing my knee. 

I was still a reservist but remained undecided about going back to Navy SEAL training. 

I looked into the Marine Corps. 

I explored theapplication process for a handful of fire fighting units but finally picked up thephone, ready to call into the BUD/S compound. 

They needed my final answer. 

I sat there, holding the telephone, and thought about the misery of SEAL training. 

Shit, you run six miles a day just to eat, not including your training runs. 

Ivisualized all the swimming and paddling, carrying heavy-ass boats and logs on ourheads, over the berm all day. 

I flashed onto hours of sit-ups, push-ups, flutter kicks,and the O-Course. 

I remembered the feeling of rolling around in the sand, of beingchafed all fucking day and night. 

My memories were a mind-body experience, and Ifelt the cold deep in my bones. 

A normal person would give up. 

They’d say, fuck it,it’s just not meant to be, and refuse to torture themselves one minute more. 

But I wasn’t wired normal. 

As I dialed the number, negativity rose up like an angry shadow. 

I couldn’t help butthink that I was put on this earth to suffer. 

Why wouldn’t my own personal demons,the fates, God, or Satan, just leave me the fuck alone? I was tired of trying to provemyself. 

Tired of callousing my mind. 

Mentally, I was worn to the nub. 

At the sametime, being worn the fuck down is the price of being hard and I knew if I quit, thosefeelings and thoughts wouldn’t just go away. 

The cost of quitting would be lifelongpurgatory. 

I’d be trapped in the knowing that I didn’t stay in the fight to the bitterend. 

There is no shame in getting knocked out. 

The shame comes when you throwin the motherfucking towel, and if I was born to suffer, then I may as well take mymedicine. 

The training officer welcomed me back and confirmed that I was starting from dayone, week one. 

As expected, my brown shirt would have to be swapped out for awhite one, and he had one more sliver of sunshine to share. 

“Just so you know,Goggins,” he said, “this will be the last time we will allow you to go throughBUD/S training. 

If you get injured, that’s it. 

We will not allow you to come backagain. 

”“Roger that,” I said. 

Class 235 would muster in just four weeks. 

My knee still wasn’t all the way right,but I’d better be ready because the ultimate test was about to begin. 

Within seconds of hanging up the phone, Pam called and said she needed to see me. 

It was good timing. 

I was leaving town again, hopefully for good this time, and Ineeded to level with her. 

We’d been enjoying one another, but it was always atemporary thing for me. 

We’d been married once and we were still different peoplewith totally different worldviews. 

That hadn’t changed and obviously neither hadsome of my insecurities, as they kept me going back to what was familiar. 

Insanityis doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result. 

Wewould never work and it was time to say so. 

She got to her news first. 

“I’m late,” she said, as she burst through the door, clutching a brown paper bag. 

“Like late late. 

” She seemed excited and nervous as she disappeared into thebathroom. 

I could hear that bag crinkle and the tearing open of a package as I lay on my bed staring at the ceiling. 

Minutes later, she opened the bathroom door, apregnancy test in her fist and a big smile on her face. 

“I knew it,” she said, bitingher lower lip. 

“Look, David, we’re pregnant!”I stood up slow, she hugged me with everything she had, and her excitement brokemy heart. 

It wasn’t supposed to go like this. 

I wasn’t ready. 

My body was stillbroken, I was $30,000 in credit card debt, and still only a reservist. 

I had no addressof my own and no car. 

I was unstable, and that made me very insecure. 

Plus, Iwasn’t even in love with this woman. 

That’s what I said to myself while I staredinto that Accountability Mirror over her shoulder. 

The mirror that never lies. 

I averted my eyes. 

Pam went home to share the news with her parents. 

I walked her to the door of mymother’s place, then slumped into the couch. 

In Coronado, I felt like I’d come toterms with my fucked up past and found some power there, and here I was suckedunder once again. 

Now it wasn’t just about me and my dreams of becoming aSEAL. 

I had a family to think about, which raised the stakes that much higher. 

If Ifailed this time, it wouldn’t mean that I was just going back to ground zero,emotionally and financially, but I would be bringing my new family there with me. 

When my mother got home I told her everything, and as we talked the dam brokeand my fear, sadness, and struggle came bursting out of me. 

I put my head in myhands and sobbed. 

“Mom, my life from the time I was born until now has been a nightmare. 

Anightmare that keeps getting worse,” I said. 

“The harder I try, the harder my lifebecomes. 

”“I can’t argue with that, David,” she said. 

My mom knew hell and she wasn’t tryingto baby me. 

She never had. 

“But I also know you well enough to know that you willfind a way to get through this. 

”“I have to,” I said as I wiped the tears from my eyes. 

“I don’t have a choice. 

”She left me alone, and I sat on that couch all night. 

I felt like I’d been stripped ofeverything, but I was still breathing, which meant I had to find a way to keep going. 

I had to compartmentalize doubt and find the strength to believe that I was born tobe more than some tired-ass Navy SEAL reject. 

After Hell Week I’d felt I hadbecome unbreakable, yet within a week I’d been zeroed out. 

I hadn’t levelled upafter all. 

I still wasn’t shit, and if I was going to fix my broke-down life, I wouldhave to become more!On that sofa, I found a way. 

By then I’d learned how to hold myself accountable, and I knew I could take aman’s soul in the heat of battle. 

I had overcome many obstacles, and realized thateach of those experiences had calloused my mind so thick, I could take on anychallenge. 

All of that that made me feel like I’d dealt with my past demons, but Ihadn’t. 

I’d been ignoring them. 

My memories of abuse at the hands of my father, ofall those people who called me nigger, didn’t vaporize after a few victories. 

Thosemoments were anchored deep in my subconscious, and as a result, my foundationwas cracked. 

In a human being your character is your foundation, and when you build a bunch of successes and pile up even more failures on a fucked-upfoundation, the structure that is the self won’t be sound. 

To develop an armoredmind—a mindset so calloused and hard that it becomes bulletproof—you need to goto the source of all your fears and insecurities. 

Most of us sweep our failures and evil secrets under the rug, but when we run intoproblems, that rug gets lifted up, and our darkness re-emerges, floods our soul, andinfluences the decisions which determine our character. 

My fears were never justabout the water, and my anxieties toward Class 235 weren’t about the pain of FirstPhase. 

They were seeping from the infected wounds I’d been walking around withmy entire life, and my denial of them amounted to a denial of myself. 

I was my ownworst enemy! It wasn’t the world, or God, or the Devil that was out to get me. 

Itwas me!I was rejecting my past and therefore rejecting myself. 

My foundation, my characterwas defined by self-rejection. 

All my fears came from that deep-seated uneasiness Icarried with being David Goggins because of what I’d gone through. 

Even after I’dreached a point where I no longer cared about what others thought of me, I still hadtrouble accepting me. 

Anyone who is of sound mind and body can sit down and think of twenty things intheir life that could have gone differently. 

Where maybe they didn’t get a fair shakeand where they took the path of least resistance. 

If you’re one of the few whoacknowledge that, want to callous those wounds, and strengthen your character, itsup to you to go back through your past and make peace with yourself by facingthose incidents and all of your negative influences, and accepting them as weakspots in your own character. 

Only when you identify and accept your weaknesseswill you finally stop running from your past. 

Then those incidents can be used moreefficiently as fuel to become better and grow stronger. 

Right there on mom’s couch, as the moon burned its arc in the night sky, I faceddown my demons. 

I faced myself. 

I couldn’t run from my dad anymore. 

I had toaccept that he was part of me and that his lying, cheating character influenced memore than I cared to admit. 

Before that night, I used to tell people that my fatherhad died rather than tell the truth about where I came from. 

Even in the SEALs Itrotted out that lie. 

I knew why. 

When you get beat up, you don’t want toacknowledge getting your ass kicked. 

It doesn’t make you feel very manly, so theeasiest thing to do is forget about it and move on. 

Pretend it never happened. 

Not anymore. 

Going forward it became very important for me to rehash my life, because whenyou examine your experiences with a fine-toothed comb and see where your issuescome from, you can find strength in enduring pain and abuse. 

By accepting TrunnisGoggins as part of me, I was free to use where I came from as fuel. 

I realized thateach episode of child abuse that could have killed me made me tough as hell and assharp as a Samurai’s blade. 

True, I had been dealt a fucked-up hand, but that night I started thinking of it asrunning a 100-mile race with a fifty-pound ruck on my back. 

Could I still competein that race even if everyone else was running free and easy, weighing 130 pounds?How fast would I be able to run once I’d shed that dead weight? I wasn’t even thinking about ultras yet. 

To me the race was life itself, and the more I tookinventory, the more I realized how prepared I was for the fucked-up events yet tocome. 

Life had put me in the fire, taken me out, and hammered me repeatedly, anddiving back into the BUD/S cauldron, feeling a third Hell Week in a calendar year,would decorate me with a PhD in pain. 

I was about to become the sharpest swordever made! ***I showed up to Class 235 on a mission and kept to myself throughout much of FirstPhase. 

There were 156 men in that class on day one. 

I still led from the front, but Iwasn’t about shepherding anyone through Hell Week this time. 

My knee was stillsore and I needed to put every ounce of energy into getting my ass through BUD/S. 

I had everything riding on the next six months, and I had no illusions about howdifficult it would be to make it through. 

Case in point: Shawn Dobbs. 

Dobbs grew up poor in Jacksonville, Florida. 

He battled some of the same demons Idid, and he came into class with a chip on his shoulder. 

Right away, I could see hewas an elite, natural athlete. 

He was at or near the front on all the runs, he blitzedthe O-Course in 8:30 after just a few reps, and he knew he was a bad motherfucker. 

Then again, like the Taoists say, those that know don’t speak, and those who speak,well, they don’t know jack shit. 

On the night before Hell Week began he talked a lot of noise about the guys inClass 235. 

There were already fifty-five helmets on the Grinder, and he was surehe’d be one of a handful of graduates at the end. 

He mentioned the guys he knewwould make it through Hell Week and also talked a lot of nonsense about the guyshe knew would quit. 

He had no clue that he was making the classic mistake of measuring himself againstothers in his class. 

When he beat them in an evolution or outperformed them duringPT, he took a lot of pride in that. 

It boosted his self-confidence and his performance. 

In BUD/S, it’s common and natural to do some of that. 

It’s all part of thecompetitive nature of the alpha males who are drawn to the SEALs, but he didn’trealize that during Hell Week you need a solid boat crew to survive, which meansdepending upon your classmates, not defeating them. 

While he talked and talked, Itook notice. 

He had no idea what was in store for him and how bad sleepdeprivation and being cold fucks you up. 

He was about to find out. 

In the earlyhours of Hell Week, he performed well, but that same drive to defeat his classmatesin evolutions and on timed runs came out on the beach. 

At 5’4” and 188 pounds, Dobbs was built like a fire hydrant, but since he was shorthe was assigned to a boat crew of smaller guys referred to as Smurfs by theinstructors. 

In fact, Psycho Pete made them draw a picture of Papa Smurf on thefront of their boat just to fuck with them. 

That’s the kind of thing our instructorsdid. 

They looked for any way to break you, and with Dobbs it worked. 

He didn’tlike being grouped up with guys he considered smaller and weaker, and took it outon his teammates. 

Over the next day he would grind his own crew down before oureyes. 

He took up the position at the front of the boat or the log and set a blistering pace on the runs. 

Instead of checking in with his crew and holding something backin reserve, he went all out from the jump. 

I reached out to him recently and he saidhe remembered BUD/S like it happened last week. 

“I was grinding an axe on my own people,” he said. 

“I was purposely beating themdown, almost like if I made guys quit, it was a checkmark on my helmet. 

”By Monday morning he’d done a decent job of it. 

Two of his guys had quit and thatmeant four smaller guys had to carry their boat and log by themselves. 

He admittedhe was fighting his own demons on that beach. 

That his foundation was cracked. 

“I was an insecure person with low self esteem trying to grind an axe,” he said,“and my own ego, arrogance, and insecurity made my own life more difficult. 

”Translation: his mind broke down in ways he’d never experienced before or since. 

On Monday afternoon we did a bay swim, and when he emerged from the water, hewas hurting. 

Watching him it was obvious he could barely walk and that his mindwas teetering on the brink. 

We locked eyes and I saw that he was asking himselfthose simple questions and couldn’t find an answer. 

He looked a lot like I did whenI was in Pararescue, searching for a way out. 

From then on Dobbs was one of theworst performers on the whole beach, and that fucked him up bad. 

“All the people I’d categorized as lower than worms were kicking my butt,” he said. 

Soon his crew was down to two men, and he got moved to another boat crew withtaller guys. 

When they lifted the boat head high, he wasn’t even able to reach thatmotherfucker, and all of his insecurities about his size and his past started caving inon him. 

“I started to believe that I didn’t belong there,” he said. 

“That I was geneticallyinferior. 

It was like I had superpowers, and I’d lost them. 

I was in a place in mymind I’d never been, and I didn’t have a road map. 

”Think about where he was at that time. 

This man had excelled through the first fewweeks of BUD/S. 

He’d come from nothing and was a phenomenal athlete. 

He hadso many experiences along the way he could have leaned on. 

He’d calloused hismind plenty, but because his foundation was cracked, when shit got real he lostcontrol of his mindset and became a slave to his self doubt. 

On Monday night, Dobbs reported to medical complaining about his feet. 

He wassure he had stress fractures, but when he took off his boots they weren’t swollen orblack and blue like he’d imagined. 

They looked perfectly healthy. 

I know thatbecause I was at med check too, sitting right beside him. 

I saw his blank stare andknew the inevitable was near. 

It was the look that comes over a man’s face after hesurrenders his soul. 

I had the same look in my eyes when I quit Pararescue. 

Whatwill forever bond me and Shawn Dobbs is the fact that I knew he was going to quitbefore he did. 

The docs offered him Motrin and sent him back into the suffering. 

I rememberwatching Shawn lace his boots, wondering at what point he would finally break. 

That’s when SBG pulled up in his truck and yelled, “This will be the coldest nightthat you will ever experience in your entire lives!” I was under my boat with my crew headed toward the infamous Steel Pier when Iglanced behind me and saw Shawn in the back of SBG’s warm truck. 

He’dsurrendered. 

Within minutes he would toll the bell three times, and place his helmetdown. 

In Dobbs’ defense, this was one nightmare of a Hell Week. 

It rained all day and allnight, which meant you never got warm and never got dry. 

Plus, somebody incommand had the brilliant idea that the class shouldn’t be fed and watered likekings at chow. 

Instead, we were supplied cold MREs for almost every meal. 

Theythought that would test us even more. 

Make it more like a real-world battlefieldsituation. 

It also meant there was absolutely no relief, and without abundant caloriesto burn it was hard for anybody to find the energy to push through pain andexhaustion, let alone keep warm. 

Yes, it was miserable, but I fucking loved it. 

I thrived off of the barbaric beauty ofseeing the soul of a man destroyed, only to rise again and overcome every obstaclein his path. 

By my third go ’round, I knew what the human body could take. 

I knewwhat I could take, and I was feeding off that shit. 

At the same time, my legs didn’tfeel right and my knee had been barking since day one. 

So far, the pain wassomething I could handle for at least a couple more days, but the thought of injurywas a whole different piece of fuck-you pie that I had to block out of my mind. 

Iwent into a dark place where there was just me and the pain and suffering. 

I didn’tfocus on my classmates or my instructors. 

I went full caveman. 

I was willing to dieto make it through that motherfucker. 

I wasn’t the only one. 

Late on Wednesday night, with thirty-six hours to go beforethe end of Hell Week, tragedy hit Class 235. 

We were in the pool for an evolutioncalled the caterpillar swim, in which each boat crew swam on their backs, legslocked around torsos, in a chain. 

We had to use our hands in concert to swim. 

We mustered up at the pool. 

There were just twenty-six guys left and one of themwas named John Skop. 

Mr. 

Skop was a specimen at 6’2” and 225 pounds, but he’dbeen sick from breakout and had been in and out of med check all week. 

Whiletwenty-five of us stood at attention on the pool deck, swollen, chafed, and bleeding,he sat on the stairs by the pool, jackhammering in the cold. 

He looked like he wasfreezing, but waves of heat poured off his skin. 

His body was a radiator on fullblast. 

I could feel him from ten feet away. 

I’d had double pneumonia during my first Hell Week and knew what it looked andfelt like. 

His alveoli, or air sacs, were filling with fluid. 

He couldn’t clear them sohe could barely breathe, which exacerbated his problem. 

When pneumonia goesuncontrolled, it can lead to pulmonary edema, which can be deadly, and he washalfway there. 

Sure enough, during the caterpillar swim, his legs went limp and he darted to thebottom of the pool like a doll stuffed with lead. 

Two instructors jumped in after himand from there it was chaos. 

They ordered us out of the water and lined us up alongthe fence with our backs facing the pool as medics worked to revive Mr. 

Skop. 

Weheard everything and knew his chances were slipping. 

Five minutes later, he stillwasn’t breathing, and they ordered us to the locker room. 

Mr. 

Skop was transportedto the hospital and we were told to run back to the BUD/S classroom. 

We didn’tknow it yet, but Hell Week was already over. 

Minutes later, SBG walked in and delivered the news cold. 

“Mr. 

Skop is dead,” he said. 

He took stock of the room. 

His words had been acollective gut punch to men who were already on the knife’s edge after nearly aweek with no sleep and no relief. 

SBG didn’t give a fuck. 

“This is the world youlive in. 

He’s not the first and he won’t be the last to die in your line of work. 

” Helooked over at Mr. 

Skop’s roommate and said, “Mr. 

Moore, don’t steal any of hisshit. 

” Then he left the room like it was just another fucked-up day. 

I felt torn between grief, nausea, and relief. 

I was sad and sick to my stomach thatMr. 

Skop had died, but we were all relieved to have survived Hell Week, plus theway SBG handled it was straight ahead, no bullshit, and I remember thinking if allSEALs were like him, this would definitely be the world for me. 

Talk about mixedemotions. 

See, most civilians don’t understand that you need a certain level of callousness todo the job we were being trained to do. 

To live in a brutal world, you have to acceptcold-blooded truths. 

I’m not saying it’s good. 

I’m not necessarily proud of it. 

Butspecial ops is a calloused world and it demands a calloused mind. 

Hell Week had ended thirty-six hours early. 

There was no pizza or brown shirtceremony on the Grinder, but twenty-five men out of a possible 156 had made it. 

Once again, I was one of the few, and once again I was swollen like a Pillsburydoughboy and on crutches with twenty-one weeks of training still to come. 

Mypatella was intact, but both of my shins were slivered with small fractures. 

It getsworse. 

The instructors were surly because they’d been forced to call Hell Weekprematurely, so they ended walk week after just forty-eight hours. 

By everyconceivable metric I was fucked. 

When I moved my ankle, my shins were activatedand I felt searing pain, which was a monumental problem because a typical week inBUD/S demands up to sixty miles of running. 

Imagine doing that on two brokenshins. 

Most of the guys in Class 235 lived on base at Naval Special Warfare Command inCoronado. 

I lived about twenty miles away in a $700 a month studio apartment witha mold problem in Chula Vista, which I shared with my pregnant wife andstepdaughter. 

After she got pregnant, Pam and I remarried, I financed a new HondaPassport—which put me roughly $60,000 in debt—and the three of us drove outfrom Indiana to San Diego to restart our family. 

I’d just cleared Hell Week for thesecond time in a calendar year and she was set to deliver our baby right aroundgraduation, but there was no happiness in my head or my soul. 

How could there be?We lived in a shithole that was at the edge of affordability, and my body was brokenonce again. 

If I couldn’t make it through I wouldn’t even be able to afford rent,would have to start all over, and find a new line of work. 

I could not and would notlet that happen. 

The night before First Phase kicked back up in intensity, I shaved my head andstared into my reflection. 

For almost two years straight I’d been taking pain to theextreme and coming back for more. 

I’d succeeded in spurts only to be buried alivein failure. 

That night, the only thing that allowed me to continue pushing forwardwas the knowledge that everything I’d been through had helped callous my mind. 

The question was, how thick was the callous? How much pain could one man take?Did I have it in me to run on broken legs? I woke up at 3:30 the next morning and drove to the base. 

I limped to the BUD/Scage where we kept our gear and slumped onto a bench, dropping my backpack atmy feet. 

It was dark as hell inside and out, and I was all alone. 

I could hear therolling surf in the distance as I dug through my dive bag. 

Buried beneath my divegear were two rolls of duct tape. 

I could only shake my head and smile in disbeliefas I grabbed them, knowing how insane my plan was. 

I carefully pulled a thick black tube sock over my right foot. 

The shin was tender tothe touch and even the slightest twitch of the ankle joint registered high on thesuffering scale. 

From there I looped the tape around my heel then up over my ankleand back down to my heel, eventually moving both down the foot and up my calfuntil my entire lower leg and foot were wrapped tight. 

That was just the first coat. 

Then I put another black tube sock on and taped my foot and ankle the same way. 

By the time I was done, I had two sock layers and two tape layers, and once my footwas laced up in the boot, my ankle and shin were protected and immobilized. 

Satisfied, I did up my left foot, and an hour later, it was as though both my lowerlegs were sunk into soft casts. 

It still hurt to walk, but the torture that I’d felt whenmy ankle moved was more tolerable. 

Or at least I thought so. 

I’d find out for surewhen we started to run. 

Our first training run that day was my trial by fire, and I did the best I could to runwith my hip flexors. 

Usually we let our feet and lower legs drive the rhythm. 

I hadto reverse that. 

It took intense focus to isolate each movement and generate motionand power in my legs from the hip down, and for the first thirty minutes the painwas the worst I’d ever felt in my life. 

The tape cut into my skin, while the poundingsent shockwaves of agony up my slivered shins. 

And this was just the first run in what promised to be five months of continual pain. 

Was it possible to survive this, day after day? I thought about quitting. 

If failure wasmy future and I’d have to rethink my life completely, what was the point of thisexercise? Why delay the inevitable? Was I fucked in the head? Each and everythought boiled down to the same old simple question: why?“The only way to guarantee failure is to quit right now, motherfucker!” I wastalking to myself now. 

Silently screaming over the din of anguish that was crushingmy mind and soul. 

“Take the pain, or it won’t just be your failure. 

It will be yourfamily’s failure!”I imagined the feeling I would have if I could actually pull this off. 

If I could endurethe pain required to complete this mission. 

That bought me another half mile beforemore pain rained down and swirled within me like a typhoon. 

“People have a hard time going through BUD/S healthy, and you’re going throughit on broken legs! Who else would even think of this?” I asked. 

“Who else would beable to run even one minute on one broken leg, let alone two? Only Goggins! Youare twenty minutes in the business, Goggins! You are a fucking machine! Each stepyou run from now until the end will only make you harder!”That last message cracked the code like a password. 

My calloused mind was myticket forward, and at the forty-minute mark something remarkable happened. 

Thepain receded to low tide. 

The tape had loosened so it wasn’t cutting into my skin,and my muscles and bones were warm enough to take some pounding. 

The pain would come and go throughout the day, but it became much more manageable, andwhen the pain did show up, I told myself it was proof of how tough I was and howmuch tougher I was becoming. 

Day after day the same ritual played itself out. 

I showed up early, duct taped myfeet, endured thirty minutes of extreme pain, talked myself through it, and survived. 

This was no fake-it-till-you-make-it bullshit. 

To me, the fact that I showed up everyday willing to put myself through something like that was truly amazing. 

Theinstructors rewarded me for it too. 

They offered to bind my hands and feet andthrow me in the pool to see if I could swim four fucking laps. 

In fact, they didn’toffer. 

They insisted. 

This was one part of an evolution they liked to call DrownProofing. 

I preferred to call it controlled drowning!With our hands bound behind us and feet tied behind our back, all we could do isdolphin kick, and unlike some of the experienced swimmers in our class, wholooked like they’d been pulled from the Michael Phelps gene pool, my dolphin kickwas that of a stationary rocking horse and provided about the same propulsion. 

Iwas continually out of breath, fighting to stay near the surface, chicken necking myhead above the water to get a breath, only to sink down and kick hard, trying in vainto find momentum. 

I’d practiced for this. 

For weeks, I’d hit the pool and evenexperimented with wetsuit shorts to see if I could hide them under my uniform toprovide some buoyancy. 

They made it look like I was wearing a diaper under thetight-ass-nut-hugging UDT shorts, and they didn’t help, but all that practice did getme comfortable enough with the feeling of drowning that I was able to endure andpass that test. 

We had another brutal underwater evolution in Second Phase, aka dive phase. 

Again, it involved treading water, which always sounds basic as hell whenever Iwrite it, but for this drill we were fitted with fully-charged, twin eighty-liter tanksand a sixteen-pound weight belt. 

We had fins, but kicking with fins increased thepain quotient and stress on my ankles and shins. 

I couldn’t tape up for the water. 

Ihad to suck up the pain. 

After that we had to swim on our backs for fifty meters without sinking. 

Then flipover and swim fifty meters on our stomach, once again staying on the surface, allwhile being fully loaded! We weren’t allowed to use any flotation deviceswhatsoever, and keeping our heads up caused intense pain in our necks, shoulders,hips, and lower backs. 

The noises coming out of the pool that day are something I’ll never forget. 

Ourdesperate attempts to stay afloat and breathe conjured an audible mixture of terror,frustration, and exertion. 

We were gurgling, grunting, and gasping. 

I heard gutturalscreams and high-pitched squeals. 

Several guys sank to the bottom, took off theirweight belts, and slipped free of their tanks, letting them crash to the floor of thepool, then jetted to the surface. 

Only one man passed that evolution on the first try. 

We only got three chances topass any given evolution and it took me all three to pass that one. 

On my lastattempt I focused on long, fluid scissor kicks, again using my overworked hipflexors. 

I barely made it. 

 By the time we got to Third Phase, the land warfare training module on SanClemente Island, my legs were healed up, and I knew I’d make it through tograduation, but just because it was the last lap doesn’t mean it was easy. 

At the mainBUD/S  compound on The Strand, you get lots of looky-loos coming through. 

Officers of all stripes stop in to watch training, which means there are peoplepeering over the instructors’ shoulders. 

On the island, it’s just you and them. 

Theyare free to get nasty, and they show no mercy. 

Which is exactly why I loved theisland!One afternoon we split into teams of two and three guys to build hide sites thatblend in with the vegetation. 

We were coming down to the end by then, andeveryone was in killer shape and unafraid. 

Guys were getting sloppy with theirattention to detail and the instructors were pissed off, so they called everyone downinto a valley to give us a classic beat down. 

There would be push-ups, sit-ups, flutter kicks, and eight-count bodybuilders(advanced burpees) galore. 

But first they told us to kneel down and dig holes withour hands, large enough to bury ourselves up to the neck for some unspecifiedlength of time. 

I was smiling my ass off and digging deep when one of theinstructors came up with a new, creative way to torture me. 

“Goggins, get up. 

You like this shit too much. 

” I laughed and kept digging, but hewas serious. 

“I said get up, Goggins. 

You’re getting way too much pleasure. 

”I stood up, stepped to the side, and watched my classmates suffer for the next thirtyminutes without me. 

From then on the instructors stopped including me in their beatdowns. 

When the class was ordered to do push-ups, sit-ups, or get wet and sandy,they’d always exclude me. 

I took it as a point of pride that I’d finally broken thewill of the entire BUD/S staff, but I also missed the beat downs. 

Because I sawthem as opportunities to callous my mind. 

Now, they were over for me. 

Considering that the Grinder was center stage for a lot of Navy SEAL training, itmakes sense that’s where BUD/S graduation is held. 

Families fly in. 

Fathers andbrothers puff their chests out; mothers, wives, and girlfriends are all done up anddrop dead gorgeous. 

Instead of pain and misery, it was all smiles on that patch ofasphalt as the graduates of Class 235 mustered up in our dress whites beneath ahuge American flag billowing in the sea breeze. 

To our right was the infamous bellthat 130 of our classmates tolled in order to quit what is arguably the mostchallenging training in the military. 

Each of us was introduced and acknowledgedindividually. 

My mother had tears of joy in her eyes when my name was called, butstrangely, I didn’t feel much of anything, except sadness. 

   Mom and I at BUD/S graduationOn the Grinder and later at McP’s—the SEAL pub of choice in downtownCoronado—my teammates beamed with pride as they gathered to take photos withtheir families. 

At the bar, music blared while everyone got drunk and raised hell like they’d just won something. 

And to be honest, that shit annoyed me. 

Because I wassorry to see BUD/S go. 

When I first locked in on the SEALs, I was looking for an arena that would eitherdestroy me completely or make me unbreakable. 

BUD/S provided that. 

It showedme what the human mind is capable of, and how to harness it to take more pain thanI’d ever felt before, so I could learn to achieve things I never even knew werepossible. 

Like running on broken legs. 

After graduation it would be up to me tocontinue to hunt impossible tasks because though it was an accomplishment tobecome just the thirty-sixth African American BUD/S graduate in Navy SEALhistory, my quest to defy the odds had only just begun!    OceanofPDF. 

com  CHALLENGE #5It’s time to visualize! Again, the average person thinks 2,000–3,000 thoughts perhour. 

Rather than focusing on bullshit you cannot change, imagine visualizing thethings you can. 

Choose any obstacle in your way, or set a new goal, and visualizeovercoming or achieving it. 

Before I engage in any challenging activity, I start bypainting a picture of what my success looks and feels like. 

I’ll think about it everyday and that feeling propels me forward when I’m training, competing, or taking onany task I choose. 

But visualization isn’t simply about daydreaming of some trophy ceremony—realor metaphorical. 

You must also visualize the challenges that are likely to arise anddetermine how you will attack those problems when they do. 

That way you can beas prepared as possible on the journey. 

When I show up for a foot race now, I drivethe entire course first, visualizing success but also potential challenges, which helpsme control my thought process. 

You can’t prepare for everything but if you engagein strategic visualization ahead of time, you’ll be as prepared as you possibly canbe. 

That also means being prepared to answer the simple questions. 

Why are you doingthis? What is driving you toward this achievement? Where does the darkness you’reusing as fuel come from? What has calloused your mind? You’ll need to have thoseanswers at your fingertips when you hit a wall of pain and doubt. 

To push through,you’ll need to channel your darkness, feed off it, and lean on your calloused mind. 

Remember, visualization will never compensate for work undone. 

You cannotvisualize lies. 

All the strategies I employ to answer the simple questions and win themind game are only effective because I put in work. 

It’s a lot more than mind overmatter. 

It takes relentless self-discipline to schedule suffering into your day, everyday, but if you do, you’ll find that at the other end of that suffering is a whole otherlife just waiting for you. 

This challenge doesn’t have to be physical, and victory doesn’t always mean youcame in first place. 

It can mean you’ve finally overcome a lifelong fear or any otherobstacle that made you surrender in the past. 

Whatever it is, tell the world yourstory about how you created your #armoredmind and where it’s taken you. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com    CHAPTER SIX    6. 

IT’S NOT ABOUT A TROPHYEverything about the race was going better than I could have hoped. 

There wereenough clouds in the sky to blunt the heat of the sun, my rhythm was as steady asthe mellow tide that sloshed against the hulls of sailboats docked in the nearby SanDiego Marina, and though my legs felt heavy, that was to be expected consideringmy “tapering“ plan the night before. 

Besides, they seemed to be loosening up as Irounded a bend to complete my ninth lap—my ninth mile—just an hour and changeinto a twenty-four-hour race. 

That’s when I saw John Metz, race director of the San Diego One Day, eyeballingme at the start-finish line. 

He was holding up his white board to inform eachcompetitor of their time and position in the overall field. 

I was in fifth place, whichevidently confused him. 

I offered a crisp nod to reassure him that I knew what I wasdoing, that I was right where I was supposed to be. 

He saw through that shit. 

Metz was a veteran. 

Always polite and soft-spoken. 

It didn’t look like there wasmuch that could faze him, but he was also a seasoned ultra-marathoner with threefifty-mile races in his saddlebag. 

He’d either reached or topped a hundred miles,seven times, and he’d achieved his personal best of 144 miles in twenty-four hourswhen he was fifty years old! Which is why it meant something to me that he lookedconcerned. 

I checked my watch, synced to a heart rate monitor I wore around my chest. 

Mypulse straddled my magic number line: 145. 

A few days earlier I’d run into my oldBUD/S instructor, SBG, at Naval Special Warfare Command. 

Most SEALs dorotations as instructors between deployments, and SBG and I worked together. 

When I told him about the San Diego One Day he insisted I wear a heart ratemonitor to pace myself. 

SBG was a big geek when it came to performance andrecovery, and I watched as he scratched out a few formulas, then turned to me andsaid, “Keep your pulse steady between 140 and 145 and you’ll be golden. 

” The nextday he handed me a heart rate monitor as a race day gift. 

If you set out to mark a course that could crack open a Navy SEAL like a walnut,chew him up, and spit him the fuck out, San Diego’s Hospitality Point would notmake the cut. 

We’re talking about terrain so vanilla it’s downright serene. 

Touristsdescend year-round for views of San Diego’s stunning marina, which spills intoMission Bay. 

The road is almost entirely smooth asphalt and perfectly flat, save abrief seven-foot incline with the pitch of a standard suburban driveway. 

There aremanicured lawns, palm trees, and shade trees. 

Hospitality Point is so inviting thatdisabled and convalescing folks head there with their walkers for an afternoon’s rehab stroll, all the time. 

But the day after John Metz chalked his easy, one-milecourse, it became the scene of my total destruction. 

I should have known that a breakdown was coming. 

By the time I started running at10 a. 

m. 

on November 12, 2005, I hadn’t run more than a mile in six months, but Ilooked like I was fit because I’d never stopped hitting the gym. 

While I wasstationed in Iraq, on my second deployment with SEAL Team Five earlier that year,I’d gotten back into serious power lifting, and my only dose of cardio was twentyminutes on the elliptical once a week. 

The point is, my cardiovascular fitness wasan absolute joke, and still I thought it was a brilliant idea to try and run a hundredmiles in twenty-four hours. 

Okay, it was always a fucked-up idea, but I considered it doable because a hundredmiles in twenty-four hours demands a pace of just under fifteen minutes a mile. 

If itcame to it, I figured I could walk that fast. 

Only, I didn’t walk. 

When that hornsounded at the start of the race, I took off hot and zoomed to the front of the pack. 

Exactly the right move if your race-day goal is to blow the fuck up. 

Also, I didn’t exactly come in well-rested. 

The night before the race, I passed by theSEAL Team Five gym on my way off base after work, and peeked in like I alwaysdid, just to see who was getting after it. 

SBG was inside warming up, and calledout. 

“Goggins,” he said, “let’s jack some fucking steel!” I laughed. 

He stared me down. 

“You know, Goggins,” he said, stepping closer, “when the Vikings were gettingready to raid a fucking village, and they were camped out in the fucking woods intheir goddam tents made out of fucking deer hides and shit, sitting around acampfire, do you think they said, Hey, let’s have some herbal fucking tea and call itan early night? Or were they more like, Fuck that, we are going to drink somevodka made out of some mushrooms and get all drunked up, so the next morningwhen they were all hung-over and pissed off they would be in the ideal mood toslaughter the shit out of some people?”SBG could be a funny motherfucker when he wanted to be, and he could see mewavering, considering my options. 

On the one hand, that man would always be myBUD/S instructor and he was one of the few instructors who was still hard, puttingout, and living the SEAL ethos every day. 

I’ll always want to impress him. 

Jackingweights the night before my first 100 mile race would definitely impress thatmasochistic motherfucker. 

Plus, his logic made some fucked-up sense to me. 

Ineeded to get my mind ready to go to war, and lifting heavy would be my way ofsaying, bring on all your pain and misery, I’m ready to go! But, honestly, who doesthat before running a hundred fucking miles?I shook my head in disbelief, threw my bag to the ground and started rackingweights. 

With heavy metal blaring from the speakers, two knuckle draggers cametogether to put the fuck out. 

Most of our work focused on the legs, including longsets of squats and dead lifts at 315 pounds. 

In between we bench pressed 225. 

Thiswas a real deal power-lifting session, and afterwards we sat on the bench next toone another and watched our quads and hamstrings quiver. 

It was fucking funny…until it wasn’t. 

 Ultra running has gone at least somewhat mainstream since then, but in 2005, mostultra races—especially the San Diego One Day—were pretty obscure, and it was allnew to me. 

When the majority of people think of ultras they picture trail runsthrough remote wilderness and don’t often imagine circuit races, but there weresome serious runners in the field at the San Diego One Day. 

This was the American National 24-Hour Championship and athletes descendedfrom all over the country hoping for a trophy, a place on the podium, and themodest winner-take-all cash prize of, ahem, $2,000. 

No, this was not a gilded event,basking in corporate sponsorship, but it was the site for a team comp between theU. 

S. 

ultra-distance national team and a team from Japan. 

Each side fielded teams offour men and four women who each ran for twenty-four hours. 

One of the topindividual athletes in the field was also from Japan. 

Her name was Ms. 

Inagaki, andearly on she and I kept pace. 

Ms. 

Inagaki and I during San Diego 100SBG turned up to cheer me on that morning with his wife and two-year-old son. 

They huddled up on the sidelines with my new wife, Kate, who I’d married a fewmonths before, a little over two years after my second divorce from Pam wasfinalized. 

When they saw me, they couldn’t help but double over in laughter. 

Notjust because SBG was still beat up from our workout the night before, and here Iwas trying to run a hundred miles, but because of how out of place I looked. 

When Ispoke to SBG about it not long ago, the scene still made him laugh. 

 “So ultra marathoners are a little weird, right,” SBG said, “and that morning it waslike there were all these skinny ass, college professor looking, fucking granolaeating weirdoes, and then there is this one big black dude who looks like a fuckinglinebacker from the Raiders, running around this track jacked the fuck up with noshirt on, and I’m thinking of that song we had in kindergarten…one of these thingsis not like the other. 

That was the song going through my head when I saw thisfucking NFL linebacker running around this damn track with all these skinny littlenerds. 

I mean they were some hard motherfuckers, those runners. 

I am not takingthat away from them, but they were all super clinical about nutrition and shit, andyou just put a pair of shoes on and said, let’s go!”He’s not wrong. 

I didn’t put much thought into my race plan at all. 

I hatched it atWalmart the night before, where I bought a fold-out lawn chair for Kate and me touse during the race and my fuel for the entire day: one box of Ritz crackers and twofour-packs of Myoplex. 

I didn’t drink much water. 

I didn’t even consider myelectrolyte or potassium levels or eat any fresh fruit. 

SBG brought me a pack ofHostess chocolate donuts when he showed up, and I gobbled those in a fewseconds. 

I mean, I was winging it for real. 

Yet, at mile fifteen I was still in fifthplace, still keeping pace with Ms. 

Inagaki, while Metz was getting more and morenervous. 

He ran up to me and tagged along. 

“You should slow down, David,” he said, “Pace yourself a bit more. 

”I shrugged. 

“I got this. 

”It’s true that I felt okay in that moment, but my bravado was also a defensemechanism. 

I knew if I were to start planning my race at that point, the bigness of itwould become too much to comprehend. 

It would feel like I was supposed to runthe length of the damn sky. 

It would feel impossible. 

In my mind, strategy was theenemy of the moment, which is where I needed to be. 

Translation: when it came toultras, I was green as fuck. 

Metz didn’t press me, but he kept a close watch. 

I finished mile twenty-five at about the four-hour mark and I was still in fifth place,still running with my new Japanese friend. 

SBG was long gone, and Kate was myonly support crew. 

I’d see her every mile, posted up in that lawn chair, offering a sipof Myoplex and an encouraging smile. 

I’d run a marathon only once before, while I was stationed in Guam. 

It wasunofficial, and I ran it with a fellow SEAL on a course we made up on the spot, butback then I was in excellent cardiovascular shape. 

Now, here I was bearing down on26. 

2 miles for just the second time in my entire life, this time without training, andonce I got there I realized that I’d run beyond known territory. 

I had twenty morehours and nearly three more marathons to go. 

Those were incomprehensiblemetrics, with no traditional milestone in between to focus on. 

I was running acrossthe sky. 

That’s when I started thinking that this could end badly. 

Metz didn’t stop trying to help. 

Each mile he’d run alongside and check on me, andme being who I am, I told him that I had everything under control and had it allfigured out. 

Which was true. 

I’d figured out that John Metz knew what the fuck hewas talking about. 

 Oh yes, the pain was becoming real. 

My quads throbbed, my feet were chafed andbleeding, and that simple question was once again bubbling up in my frontal lobe. 

Why? Why run a hundred fucking miles without training? Why was I doing this tomyself? Fair questions, especially since I hadn’t even heard of the San Diego OneDay until three days before race day, but this time my answer was different. 

I wasn’ton Hospitality Point to deal with my own demons or to prove anything at all. 

I camewith a purpose bigger than David Goggins. 

This fight was about my once and futurefallen teammates, and the families they leave behind when shit goes wrong. 

Or at least that’s what I told myself at mile twenty-seven. 

***I had gotten the news about Operation Red Wings, a doomed operation in theremote mountains of Afghanistan, on my last day of U. 

S. 

Army Freefall school inYuma, Arizona, in June. 

Operation Red Wings was a four-man reconnaissancemission tasked with gathering intelligence on a growing pro-Taliban force in aregion called Sawtalo Sar. 

If successful, what they learned would help definestrategy for a larger offensive in the coming weeks. 

I knew all four guys. 

Danny Dietz was in BUD/S Class 231 with me. 

He got injured and rolled just like Idid. 

Michael Murphy, the OIC of the mission, was with me in Class 235 before hegot rolled. 

Matthew Axelson was in my Hooyah Class when I graduated (more onthe Hooyah Class tradition in a moment), and Marcus Luttrell was one of the firstpeople I met on my original lap through BUD/S. 

Before training begins, each incoming BUD/S class throws a party, and the guysfrom previous classes who are still in BUD/S training are always invited. 

The ideais to juice as much information from brown shirts as possible, because you neverknow what might help get you through a crucial evolution that could make all thedifference between graduation and failure. 

Marcus was 6’4”, 225 pounds, and hestuck out in that crowd like I did. 

I was a bigger guy too, back up to 210 by then,and he sought me out. 

In some ways we were an odd pair. 

He was a hard-ass axehandle from the Texas rangeland, and I was a self-made masochist from the Indianacornfields, but he’d heard I was a good runner, and running was his main weakness. 

“Goggins, do you have any tips for me?” he asked. 

“Because I can’t run for shit. 

”I knew Marcus was a badass, but his humility made him real. 

When he graduated afew days later, we were his Hooyah Class, which meant we were the first peoplethey were allowed to order around. 

They embraced that SEAL tradition and told usto go get wet and sandy. 

It was a SEAL’s rite of passage, and an honor to share thatwith him. 

After that I didn’t see him for a long time. 

I thought I ran into him again when I was about to graduate with Class 235, but itwas his twin brother, Morgan Luttrell, who was part of my Hooyah Class, Class237, along with Matthew Axelson. 

We could have ordered up some poetic justice,but after we graduated, instead of telling their class to go get wet and sandy, we putourselves in the surf, in our dress whites!I had something to do with that. 

 In the Navy SEALs, you are either deployed and operating in the field, instructingother SEALs, or in school yourself, learning or perfecting skills. 

We cycle throughmore military schools than most because we are trained to do it all, but when I wentthrough BUD/S we didn’t learn to freefall. 

We jumped by static lines, whichdeployed our chutes automatically. 

Back then you had to be chosen to attend U. 

S. 

Army Freefall School. 

After my second platoon, I was picked up for Green Teamwhich is one of the training phases to get accepted into the Naval Special WarfareDevelopment Group (DEVGRU), an elite unit within the SEALs. 

That required meto get freefall qualified. 

It also required that I face my fear of heights in the mostconfrontational way possible. 

We started off in the classrooms and wind tunnels of Fort Bragg, North Carolina,which is where I reconnected with Morgan in 2005. 

Floating on a bed ofcompressed air in a fifteen-foot-high wind tunnel, we learned correct body position,how to shift left and right, and push forward and back. 

It takes very smallmovements with your palm to move and it’s easy to start spinning out of control,which is never good. 

Not everyone could master those subtleties but those of uswho could left Fort Bragg after that first week of training and headed to an airstripin the cactus fields of Yuma to start jumping for real. 

Morgan and I trained and hung out together for four weeks in the 127-degree desertheat of summer. 

We did dozens of jumps out of C130 transport jets from altitudesranging from 12,500 to 19,000 feet, and there is no rush like the surge of adrenalineand paranoia that comes with plummeting to earth from high altitude at terminalvelocity. 

Each time we jumped I couldn’t help but think of Scott Gearen, thePararescuman who survived a botched jump from high altitude and inspired me onthis path when I met him as a high school student. 

He was a constant presence forme in that desert, and a cautionary tale. 

Proof that something can go horribly wrongon any given jump. 

When I jumped out of an airplane for the first time from high altitude, all I felt wasextreme fear, and I couldn’t pry my eyes from my altimeter. 

I wasn’t able toembrace the jump because fear had clogged my mind. 

All I could think about waswhether or not my canopy would open. 

I was missing the unbelievable thrill-ride ofthe freefall, the beauty of the mountains painted against the horizon, and the wide-open sky. 

But as I became conditioned to the risk, my tolerance for that same fearincreased. 

It was always there, but I was used to the discomfort and before long Iwas able to handle multiple tasks on a jump and appreciate the moment too. 

Sevenyears earlier I had been rooting around fast food kitchens and open dumpsterszapping vermin. 

Now I was fucking flying!The final task in Yuma was a midnight jump in full kit. 

We were weighed downwith a fifty-pound rucksack, strapped with a rifle and an oxygen mask for thefreefall. 

We were also equipped with chem lights, which were a necessity becausewhen the back ramp of the C-130 opened up, it was pitch black. 

We couldn’t see any damn thing, but still we leapt into that moonless sky, eight ofus in a line, one after another. 

We were supposed to form an arrow, and as Imaneuvered through the real-world wind tunnel to take my place in the granddesign, all I could see were swerving lights streaking like comets in an inkwell sky. 

My goggles fogged up as the wind ripped through me. 

We fell for a full minute, andwhen we deployed our chutes at around 4,000 feet, the overpowering sound went from full tornado to eerie silence. 

It was so quiet I could hear my heart beat throughmy chest. 

It was fucking bliss, and when we all landed safely, we were freefallqualified! We had no idea that at that moment, in the mountains of Afghanistan,Marcus and his team were locked into an all-out battle for their lives, at the centerof what would become the worst incident in SEAL history. 

One of the best things about Yuma is that you have horrible cell service. 

I’m not bigon texting or talking on the phone so this gave me four weeks of peace. 

When yougraduate any military school, the last thing you do is clean all the areas your classused until it’s like you were never there. 

My cleaning detail was in charge of thebathrooms, which happened to be one of the only places in Yuma that has cellservice, and as soon as I walked in I could hear my phone blow up. 

Text messagesabout Operation Red Wings going bad flooded in, and as I read them my soul broke. 

Morgan hadn’t heard anything about it yet, so I walked outside, found him, and toldhim the news. 

I had to. 

Marcus and his crew were all MIA and presumed KIA. 

Henodded, considered it for a second, and said, “My brother’s not dead. 

”Morgan is seven minutes older than Marcus. 

They were inseparable as kids, and thefirst time they’d ever been apart for longer than a day was when Marcus joined theNavy. 

Morgan opted for college before joining up, and during Marcus’ Hell Week,he tried to stay up the whole time in solidarity. 

He wanted and needed to share thatfeeling, but there is no such thing as a Hell Week simulation. 

You have to gothrough it to know it, and those that survive are forever changed. 

In fact, the periodafter Marcus survived Hell Week and before Morgan became a SEAL himself wasthe only time there was any emotional distance between the brothers, which speaksto the power of those 130 hours and their emotional toll. 

Once Morgan wentthrough it for real, everything was right again. 

They each have half a Tridenttattooed on their back. 

The picture is only complete when they stand side by side. 

Morgan took off immediately to drive to San Diego and figure out what the hell wasgoing on. 

He still hadn’t heard anything about the operation directly, but once hereached civilization and his service hit, a tide of messages flooded his phone too. 

He floored his rental car to 120 mph and zoomed directly to the base in Coronado. 

Morgan knew all the guys in his brother’s unit well. 

Axelson was his classmate inBUD/S, and as facts trickled in it was obvious to most that his brother wouldn’t befound alive. 

I thought he was gone too, but you know what they say about twins. 

“I knew my brother was out there, alive,” Morgan told me when we connectedagain in April 2018. 

“I said that the whole time. 

”I’d called Morgan to talk about old times and asked him about the hardest week inhis life. 

From San Diego, he flew out to his family’s ranch in Huntsville, Texas,where they were getting updates twice a day. 

Dozens of fellow SEALs turned up toshow support, Morgan said, and for five long days, he and his family criedthemselves to sleep at night. 

To them it was torture knowing that Marcus might bealive and alone in hostile territory. 

When officials from the Pentagon arrived,Morgan made himself clear as cut glass, “[Marcus] may be hurt and fucked up, buthe’s alive and either you go out there and find him, or I will!”Operation Red Wings went horribly wrong because there were many more pro-Taliban hajjis active in those mountains than had been expected, and once Marcus and his team were discovered by villagers there, it was four guys against a well-armed militia of somewhere between 30–200 men (reports on the size of the pro-Taliban force vary). 

Our guys took RPG and machine gun fire, and fought hard. 

Four SEALs can put on a hell of a show. 

Each one of us can usually do as muchdamage as five regular troops, and they made their presence felt. 

The battle played out along a ridgeline above 9,000 feet in elevation, where theyhad communication troubles. 

When they finally broke through and the situation wasmade plain to their commanding officer back at special operations headquarters, aquick reaction force of Navy SEALs, marines, and aviators from 160th SpecialOperations Aviation Regiment was assembled, but they were delayed for hoursbecause of lack of transport capacity. 

One thing about the SEAL teams is we don’thave our own transport. 

In Afghanistan we hitch rides with the Army, and thatdelayed relief. 

They eventually loaded up into two Chinook transport choppers and four attackhelicopters (two Black Hawks and two Apaches) and took off for Sawtalo Sar. 

TheChinooks took the lead, and as they closed in on the ridge, they were hit by smallarms fire. 

Despite the onslaught, the first Chinook hovered, attempting to unloadeight Navy SEALs on a mountain top, but they made a fat target, lingered too long,and were hit with a rocket propelled grenade. 

The bird spun, crashed into themountain, and exploded. 

Everyone aboard was killed. 

The remaining choppersbailed out, and by the time they could return with ground assets, everyone who wasleft behind, including Marcus’ three teammates on Operation Red Wings, was founddead. 

Everyone, that is, except for Marcus. 

Marcus was hit multiple times by enemy fire and went missing for five days. 

Hewas saved by Afghan villagers who nursed and sheltered him, and was finally foundalive by U. 

S. 

troops on July 3, 2005, when he became the lone survivor of a missionthat took the lives of nineteen special operations warriors, including eleven NavySEALs. 

No doubt, you’ve heard this story before. 

Marcus wrote a bestselling book about it,Lone Survivor, which became a hit movie starring Mark Wahlberg. 

But in 2005, thatwas all years away, and in the aftermath of the worst battlefield loss ever to hit theSEALs, I was looking for a way to contribute to the families of the men who werekilled. 

It’s not like bills stop rolling in after a tragedy like that. 

There were wivesand kids out there with basic needs to fulfill, and eventually they’d need theircollege educations covered too. 

I wanted to help in any way I could. 

A few weeks before all of this, I’d spent an evening Googling around for theworld’s toughest foot races and landed on a race called Badwater 135. 

I’d nevereven heard of ultra marathons before, and Badwater was an ultra marathoner’s ultramarathon. 

It started below sea level in Death Valley and finished at the end of theroad at Mount Whitney Portal, a trailhead located at 8,374 feet. 

Oh, and the racetakes place in late July, when Death Valley isn’t just the lowest place on Earth. 

It’salso the hottest. 

Seeing images from that race materialize on my monitor terrified and thrilled me. 

The terrain looked all kinds of harsh, and the expressions on tortured runners’ facesreminded me of the kind of thing I saw in Hell Week. 

Until then, I’d alwaysconsidered the marathon to be the pinnacle of endurance racing, and now I was seeing there were several levels beyond it. 

I filed the information away and figuredI’d come back to it someday. 

Then Operation Red Wings happened, and I vowed to run Badwater 135 to raisemoney for the Special Operations Warrior Foundation, a non-profit founded as abattlefield promise in 1980, when eight special operations warriors died in ahelicopter crash during the famous hostage rescue operation in Iran and leftseventeen children behind. 

The surviving servicemen promised to make sure eachone of those kids had the money to go to college. 

Their work continues. 

Withinthirty days of a fatality, like those that occurred during Operation Red Wings, thefoundation’s hardworking staff reach out to surviving family members. 

“We are the interfering aunt,” said Executive Director Edie Rosenthal. 

“We becomea part of our students’ lives. 

”They pay for preschool and private tutoring during grade school. 

They arrangecollege visits and host peer support groups. 

They help with applications, buy books,laptop computers, and printers, and cover tuition at whichever school one of theirstudents manages to gain acceptance, not to mention room and board. 

They alsosend students to vocational schools. 

It’s all up to the kids. 

As I write this, thefoundation has 1,280 kids in their program. 

They are an amazing organization, and with them in mind, I called Chris Kostman,Race Director of Badwater 135, at 7 a. 

m. 

in mid-November, 2005. 

I tried tointroduce myself, but he cut me off, sharp. 

“Do you know what time it is?!” hesnapped. 

I took the phone away from my ear and stared at it for a second. 

In those days, by 7a. 

m. 

on a typical weekday I’d have already rocked a two-hour gym workout andwas ready for a day’s work. 

This dude was half asleep. 

“Roger that,” I said. 

“I’ll callyou back at 0900. 

”My second call didn’t go much better, but at least he knew who I was. 

SBG and Ihad already discussed Badwater and he’d emailed Kostman a letter ofrecommendation. 

SBG has raced triathlons, captained a team through the Eco-Challenge, and watched several Olympic qualifiers attempt BUD/S. 

In his email toKostman, he wrote that I was the “best endurance athlete with the greatest mentaltoughness” he’d ever seen. 

To put me, a kid who came from nothing, at the top ofhis list meant the world to me and still does. 

It didn’t mean shit to Chris Kostman. 

He was the definition of unimpressed. 

Thekind of unimpressed that can only come from real-world experience. 

When he wastwenty years old he’d competed in the Race Across America bicycle race, andbefore taking over as Badwater race director, he’d run three 100-mile races inwinter in Alaska and completed a triple Ironman triathlon, which ends with aseventy-eight-mile run. 

Along the way, he’d seen dozens of supposedly greatathletes crumble beneath the anvil of ultra. 

Weekend warriors sign up for and complete marathons after a few months’ trainingall the time, but the gap between marathon running and becoming an ultra athlete ismuch wider, and Badwater was the absolute apex of the ultra universe. 

In 2005,there were approximately twenty-two 100-mile races held in the United States, and none had the combination of the elevation gain and unforgiving heat that Badwater135 brought to the table. 

Just to put on the race, Kostman had to wranglepermissions and assistance from five government agencies, including the NationalForest Service, the National Park Service, and the California Highway Patrol, andhe knew that if he allowed some greenhorn into the most difficult race everconceived, in the middle of summer, that motherfucker might die, and his racewould vaporize overnight. 

No, if he was going to let me compete in Badwater, I wasgoing to have to earn it. 

Because earning my way in would provide him at leastsome comfort that I probably wouldn’t collapse into a steaming pile of road killsomewhere between Death Valley and Mount Whitney. 

In his email, SBG attempted to make a case that because I was busy working as aSEAL, the prerequisites required to compete at Badwater—the completion of atleast one 100-mile race or one twenty-four-hour race, while covering at least onehundred miles—should be waived. 

If I was allowed in, SBG guaranteed him that I’dfinish in the top ten. 

Kostman wasn’t having any of it. 

He’d had accomplishedathletes beg him to waive his standards over the years, including a championmarathoner and a champion sumo wrestler (yeah, no shit), and he’d never budged. 

“One thing about me is, I’m the same with everyone,” Kostman said when I calledhim back. 

“We have certain standards for getting into our race, and that’s the way itis. 

But hey, there’s this twenty-four-hour race in San Diego coming up thisweekend,” he continued, his voice dripping with sarcasm. 

“Go run one hundredmiles and get back to me. 

”Chris Kostman had made me. 

I was as unprepared as he suspected. 

The fact that Iwanted to run Badwater was no lie, and I planned to train for it, but to even have achance to do that I’d have to run one hundred miles at the drop of a damn hat. 

If Ichose not to, after all that Navy SEAL bluster, what would that prove? That I wasjust another pretender ringing his bell way too early on a Wednesday morning. 

Which is how and why I wound up running the San Diego One Day with threedays’ notice. 

***After surpassing the fifty-mile mark, I could no longer keep up with Ms. 

Inagaki,who bounded ahead like a damn rabbit. 

I soldiered on in a fugue state. 

Pain washedthrough me in waves. 

My thighs felt like they were loaded with lead. 

The heavierthey got the more twisted my stride became. 

I torqued my hips to keep my legsmoving and fought gravity to lift my feet a mere millimeter from the earth. 

Ah, yes,my feet. 

My bones were becoming more brittle by the second, and my toes hadbanged the tips of my shoes for nearly ten hours. 

Still, I fucking ran. 

Not fast. 

Notwith much style. 

But I kept going. 

My shins were the next domino to fall. 

Each subtle rotation of the ankle joint feltlike shock therapy—like venom flowing through the marrow of my tibia. 

It broughtback memories of my duct tape days from Class 235, but I didn’t bring any tapewith me this time. 

Besides, if I stopped for even a few seconds, starting up againwould be near impossible. 

 A few miles later, my lungs seized, and my chest rattled as I hocked up knots ofbrown mucus. 

It got cold. 

I became short of breath. 

Fog gathered around thehalogen street lights, ringing the lamps with electric rainbows, which lent the wholeevent an otherworldly feel. 

Or maybe it was just me in that other world. 

One inwhich pain was the mother tongue, a language synced to memory. 

With every lung-scraping cough I flashed to my first BUD/S class. 

I was back onthe motherfucking log, staggering ahead, my lungs bleeding. 

I could feel and see ithappening all over again. 

Was I asleep? Was I dreaming? I opened my eyes wide,pulled my ears and slapped my face to wake up. 

I felt my lips and chin for freshblood, and found a translucent slick of saliva, sweat, and mucus dribbling from mynose. 

SBG’s hard-ass nerds were all around me now, running in circles, pointing,mocking the only; the only black man in the mix. 

Or were they? I took anotherlook. 

Everyone who passed me was focused. 

Each in their own pain zone. 

Theydidn’t even see me. 

I was losing touch with reality in small doses, because my mind was folding overon itself, loading tremendous physical pain with dark emotional garbage it haddredged up from the depths of my soul. 

Translation: I was suffering on an unholylevel reserved for dumb fucks who thought the laws of physics and physiology didnot apply to them. 

Cocky bastards like me who felt like they could push the limitssafely because they’d done a couple of Hell Weeks. 

Right, well, I hadn’t done this. 

I hadn’t run one hundred miles with zero training. 

Had anybody in the history of mankind even attempted something so fuckingfoolish? Could this even be done at all? Iterations of that one simple question slidby like a digital ticker on my brain screen. 

Bloody thought bubbles floated from myskin and soul. 

Why? Why? Why the fuck are you still doing this to yourself?!I hit the incline at mile sixty-nine—that seven-foot ramp, the pitch of a shallowdriveway—which would make any seasoned trail runner laugh out loud. 

It buckledmy knees and sent me reeling backward like a delivery truck in neutral. 

I staggered,reached for the ground with the tips of my fingers, and nearly capsized. 

It took tenseconds to cover the distance. 

Each one dragged out like an elastic thread, sendingshockwaves of pain from my toes to the space behind my eyeballs. 

I hacked andcoughed, my gut twisted. 

Collapse was imminent. 

Collapse is what the fuck Ideserved. 

At the seventy-mile mark I couldn’t take another step forward. 

Kate had set up ourlawn chair on the grass near the start/finish line and when I teetered toward her Isaw her in triplicate, six hands groping toward me, guiding me into that foldingchair. 

I was dizzy and dehydrated, starved of potassium and sodium. 

Kate was a nurse; I had EMT training, and went through my own mental checklist. 

Iknew my blood pressure was probably dangerously low. 

She removed my shoes. 

My foot pain was no Shawn Dobbs illusion. 

My white tube socks were caked inblood from cracked toenails and broken blisters. 

I asked Kate to grab some Motrinand anything she thought might be helpful from John Metz. 

And when she wasgone, my body continued to decline. 

My stomach rumbled and when I looked downI saw bloody piss leak down my leg. 

I shit myself too. 

Liquefied diarrhea rose in the space between my ass and a lawn chair that would never be quite the same again. 

Worse, I had to hide it because I knew if Kate saw how bad off I really was shewould beg me to pull out of the race. 

I’d run seventy miles in twelve hours with no training, and this was my reward. 

Tomy left on the lawn was another four-pack of Myoplex. 

Only a muscle head like mewould choose that thick-ass protein drink as my hydrating agent of choice. 

Next toit was half a box of Ritz crackers, the other half now congealing and churning in mystomach and intestinal tract like an orange blob. 

I sat there with my head in my hands for twenty minutes. 

Runners shuffled, glided,or staggered past me, as I felt time tick down on my hastily imagined, ill-conceiveddream. 

Kate returned, knelt down, and helped me lace back up. 

She didn’t know theextent of my breakdown and hadn’t quit on me yet. 

That was something, at least,and in her hands were a welcome reprieve from more Myoplex and more Ritzcrackers. 

She handed me Motrin, then some cookies and two peanut butter and jellysandwiches, which I washed down with Gatorade. 

Then she helped me stand. 

The world wobbled on its axis. 

Again she split into two, then three, but she held methere as my world stabilized and I took a single, solitary step. 

Cue the ungodly pain. 

I didn’t know it yet, but my feet were slivered with stress fractures. 

The toll ofhubris is heavy on the ultra circuit, and my bill had come due. 

I took another step. 

And another. 

I winced. 

My eyes watered. 

Another step. 

She let go. 

I walked on. 

Slowly. 

Way too fucking slow. 

When I stopped at the seventy-mile mark, I was well ahead of the pace I needed torun one hundred miles in twenty four hours, but now I was walking at a twenty-minute-a-mile clip, which was as fast as I could possibly move. 

Ms. 

Inagakibreezed by me and glanced over. 

There was pain in her eyes too, but she still lookedthe part of an athlete. 

I was a motherfucking zombie, giving away all the precioustime I stored up, watching my margin for error burn to ash. 

Why? Again the sameboring question. 

Why? Four hours later, at nearly 2 a. 

m. 

, I hit the eighty-one-milemark and Kate broke some news. 

“I don’t believe you’re gonna make the time at this pace,” she said, walking withme, encouraging me to drink more Myoplex. 

She didn’t cushion the blow. 

She wasmatter-of-fact about it. 

I stared over at her, mucus and Myoplex dripping down mychin, all the life drained from my eyes. 

For four hours, each agonizing step haddemanded maximum focus and effort, but it wasn’t enough and unless I could findmore, my philanthropic dream was dead. 

I choked and coughed. 

Took another sip. 

“Roger that,” I said softly. 

I knew that she was right. 

My pace continued to slowand was only getting worse. 

That’s when I finally realized that this fight wasn’t about Operation Red Wings orthe families of the fallen. 

It was to a point, but none of that would help me runnineteen more miles before 10 a. 

m. 

No, this run, Badwater, my entire desire to pushmyself to the brink of destruction, was about me. 

It was about how much I waswilling to suffer, how much more I could take, and how much I had to give. 

If I was gonna make it, this shit would have to get personal. 

I stared down at my legs. 

I could still see a trail of dried piss and blood stuck to myinner thigh and thought to myself, who in this entire fucked-up world would still bein this fight? Only you, Goggins! You haven’t trained, you don’t know dick abouthydration and performance—all you know is you refuse to quit. 

Why?It’s funny, humans tend to hatch our most challenging goals and dreams, the onesthat demand our greatest effort yet promise absolutely nothing, when we are tuckedinto our comfort zones. 

I was at work when Kostman laid out his challenge for me. 

I’d just had a warm shower. 

I was fed and watered. 

I was comfortable. 

And lookingback, every single time I’ve been inspired to do something difficult, I was in a softenvironment, because it all sounds doable when you’re chilling on your fuckingcouch, with a glass of lemonade or a chocolate shake in your hand. 

When we’recomfortable we can’t answer those simple questions that are bound to arise in theheat of battle because we don’t even realize they’re coming. 

But those answers are very important when you are no longer in your air-conditioned room or under your fluffy blanket. 

When your body is broken andbeaten, when you’re confronted with agonizing pain and staring into the unknown,your mind will spin, and that’s when those questions become toxic. 

If you aren’tprepared in advance, if you allow your mind to remain undisciplined in anenvironment of intense suffering (it won’t feel like it, but it is very much a choiceyou are making), the only answer you are likely to find is the one that will make itstop as fast as possible. 

I don’t know. 

Hell Week changed everything for me. 

It allowed me to have the mindset to sign upfor that twenty-four-hour race with less than a week’s notice because during HellWeek you live all the emotions of life, all the highs and lows, in six days. 

In 130hours, you earn decades of wisdom. 

That’s why there was a schism between thetwins after Marcus went through BUD/S. 

He’d gained the kind of self-knowledgethat can only come from being broken down to nothing and finding more within. 

Morgan couldn’t speak that language until he endured it for himself. 

After surviving two Hell Weeks and participating in three, I was a native speaker. 

Hell Week was home. 

It was the fairest place I’ve ever been in this world. 

Therewere no timed evolutions. 

There was nothing graded, and there were no trophies. 

Itwas an all-out war of me against me, and that’s exactly where I found myself againwhen I was reduced to my absolute lowest on Hospitality Point. 

Why?! Why are you still doing this to yourself, Goggins?!“Because you are one hard motherfucker,” I screamed. 

The voices in my head were so penetrating, I had to bite back out loud. 

I was ontosomething. 

I felt an energy build immediately, as I realized that still being in thefight was a miracle in itself. 

Except it wasn’t a miracle. 

God didn’t come down andbless my ass. 

I did this! I kept going when I should have quit five hours ago. 

I am the reason I still have a chance. 

And I remembered something else too. 

This wasn’tthe first time I’d taken on a seemingly impossible task. 

I picked up my pace. 

I wasstill walking, but I wasn’t sleepwalking anymore. 

I had life! I kept digging into mypast, into my own imaginary Cookie Jar. 

I remembered as a kid, no matter how fucked up our life was, my mother alwaysfigured out a way to stock our damn cookie jar. 

She’d buy wafers and Oreos,Pepperidge Farm Milanos and Chips Ahoy!, and whenever she showed up with anew batch of cookies, she dumped them into one jar. 

With her permission we’d getto pick one or two out at a time. 

It was like a mini treasure hunt. 

I remember the joyof dropping my fist into that jar, wondering what I’d find, and before I crammed thecookie in my mouth I always took the time to admire it first, especially when wewere broke in Brazil. 

I’d turn it around in my hand and say my own little prayer ofthanks. 

The feeling of being that kid, locked in a moment of gratitude for a simplegift like a cookie, came back to me. 

I felt it viscerally, and I used that concept tostuff a new kind of Cookie Jar. 

Inside it were all my past victories. 

Like the time when I had to study three times as hard as anybody else during mysenior year in high school just to graduate. 

That was a cookie. 

Or when I passed theASVAB test as a senior and then again to get into BUD/S. 

Two more cookies. 

Iremembered dropping over a hundred pounds in under three months, conqueringmy fear of water, graduating BUD/S at the top of my class, and being namedEnlisted Honor Man in Army Ranger School (more on that soon). 

All those werecookies loaded with chocolate chunks. 

These weren’t mere flashbacks. 

I wasn’t just floating through my memory files, Iactually tapped into the emotional state I felt during those victories, and in so doingaccessed my sympathetic nervous system once again. 

My adrenaline took over, thepain started to fade just enough, and my pace picked up. 

I began swinging my armsand lengthening my stride. 

My fractured feet were still a bloody mess, full ofblisters, the toenails peeling off almost every toe, but I kept pounding, and soon itwas me who was slaloming runners with pained expressions as I raced the clock. 

From then on, the Cookie Jar became a concept I’ve employed whenever I need areminder of who I am and what I’m capable of. 

We all have a cookie jar inside us,because life, being what it is, has always tested us. 

Even if you’re feeling low andbeat down by life right now, I guarantee you can think of a time or two when youovercame odds and tasted success. 

It doesn’t have to be a big victory either. 

It canbe something small. 

I know we all want the whole victory today, but when I was teaching myself to readI would be happy when I could understand every word in a single paragraph. 

I knewI still had a long way to go to move from a third-grade reading level to that of asenior in high school, but even a small win like that was enough to keep meinterested in learning and finding more within myself. 

You don’t drop one hundredpounds in less than three months without losing five pounds in a week first. 

Thosefirst five pounds I lost were a small accomplishment, and it doesn’t sound like a lot,but at the time it was proof that I could lose weight and that my goal, howeverimprobable, was not impossible!The engine in a rocket ship does not fire without a small spark first. 

We all needsmall sparks, small accomplishments in our lives to fuel the big ones. 

Think of your small accomplishments as kindling. 

When you want a bonfire, you don’t start bylighting a big log. 

You collect some witch’s hair—a small pile of hay or some dry,dead grass. 

You light that, and then add small sticks and bigger sticks before youfeed your tree stump into the blaze. 

Because it’s the small sparks, which start smallfires, that eventually build enough heat to burn the whole fucking forest down. 

If you don’t have any big accomplishments to draw on yet, so be it. 

Your smallvictories are your cookies to savor, and make sure you do savor them. 

Yeah, I washard on myself when I looked in the Accountability Mirror, but I also praisedmyself whenever I could claim a small victory, because we all need that, and veryfew of us take the time to celebrate our successes. 

Sure, in the moment, we mightenjoy them, but do we ever look back on them and feel that win again and again?Maybe that sounds narcissistic to you. 

But I’m not talking about bullshitting aboutthe glory days here. 

I’m not suggesting you crawl up your own ass and bore yourfriends with all your stories about what a badass you used to be. 

Nobody wants tohear that shit. 

I’m talking about utilizing past successes to fuel you to new andbigger ones. 

Because in the heat of battle, when shit gets real, we need to drawinspiration to push through our own exhaustion, depression, pain, and misery. 

Weneed to spark a bunch of small fires to become the motherfucking inferno. 

But digging into the Cookie Jar when things are going south takes focus anddetermination because at first the brain doesn’t want to go there. 

It wants to remindyou that you’re suffering and that your goal is impossible. 

It wants to stop you so itcan stop the pain. 

That night in San Diego was the most difficult night of my life,physically. 

I’d never felt so broken, and there were no souls to take. 

I wasn’tcompeting for a trophy. 

There was no one standing in my way. 

All I had to draw onto keep myself going was me. 

The Cookie Jar became my energy bank. 

Whenever the pain got to be too much, Idug into it and took a bite. 

The pain was never gone, but I only felt it in wavesbecause my brain was otherwise occupied, which allowed me to drown out thesimple questions and shrink time. 

Each lap became a victory lap, celebrating adifferent cookie, another small fire. 

Mile eighty-one became eighty-two, and anhour and a half later, I was in the nineties. 

I’d run ninety fucking miles with notraining! Who does that shit? An hour later I was at ninety-five, and after nearlynineteen hours of running almost non-stop, I’d done it! I’d hit one hundred miles!Or had I? I couldn’t remember, so I ran one more lap just to make sure. 

After running 101 miles, my race finally over, I staggered to my lawn chair andKate placed a camouflaged poncho liner over my body as I shivered in the fog. 

Steam poured off me. 

My vision was blurred. 

I remember feeling something warmon my leg, looked down and saw I was pissing blood again. 

I knew what wascoming next, but the port-a-potties were about forty feet away, which may as wellhave been forty miles, or 4,000. 

I tried to get up but I was way too dizzy andcollapsed back into that chair, an immovable object ready to accept the inevitabletruth that I was about to shit myself. 

It was much worse this time. 

My entirebackside and lower back were smeared with warm feces. 

Kate knew what an emergency looked like. 

She sprinted to our Toyota Camry andbacked the car up on the grassy knoll beside me. 

My legs were stiff as fossils frozenin stone, and I leaned on her to slide into the backseat. 

She was frantic behind thewheel and wanted to take me directly to the ER, but I wanted to go home. 

 We lived on the second deck of an apartment complex in Chula Vista, and I leanedon her back with my arms around her neck as she led me up that staircase. 

Shebalanced me up against the stucco as she opened the door to our apartment. 

I took afew steps inside before blacking out. 

I came to, on the kitchen floor, a few minutes later. 

My back was still smeared withshit, my thighs caked in blood and urine. 

My feet were blistered up and bleeding intwelve places. 

Seven of my ten toenails were dangling loose, connected only bytabs of dead skin. 

We had a combination tub and shower and she got the showergoing before helping me crawl toward the bathroom and climb into the tub. 

Iremember lying there, naked, with the shower pouring down upon me. 

I shivered,felt and looked like death, and then I started peeing again. 

But instead of blood orurine, what came out of me looked like thick brown bile. 

Petrified, Kate stepped into the hall to dial my mom. 

She’d been to the race with afriend of hers who happened to be a doctor. 

When he heard my symptoms, thedoctor suggested that I might be in kidney failure and that I needed to go to the ERimmediately. 

Kate hung up, stormed into the bathroom, and found me lying on myleft side, in the fetal position. 

“We need to get you to the ER now, David!”She kept talking, shouting, crying, trying to reach me through the haze, and I heardmost of what she said, but I knew if we went to the hospital they’d give me painkillers and I didn’t want to mask this pain. 

I’d just accomplished the most amazingfeat in my entire life. 

It was harder than Hell Week, more significant to me thanbecoming a SEAL, and more challenging than my deployment to Iraq because thistime I had done something I’m not sure anyone had ever done before. 

I ran 101miles with zero preparation. 

I knew then that I’d been selling myself short. 

That there was a whole new level ofperformance out there to tap into. 

That the human body can withstand andaccomplish a hell of a lot more than most of us think possible, and that it all beginsand ends in the mind. 

This wasn’t a theory. 

It wasn’t something I’d read in a damnbook. 

I’d experienced it first hand on Hospitality Point. 

This last part. 

This pain and suffering. 

This was my trophy ceremony. 

I’d earnedthis. 

This was confirmation that I’d mastered my own mind—at least for a littlewhile—and that what I’d just accomplished was something special. 

As I lay there,curled up in the tub, shivering in the fetal position, relishing the pain, I thought ofsomething else too. 

If I could run 101 miles with zero training, imagine what Icould do with a little preparation. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com  CHALLENGE #6Take inventory of your Cookie Jar. 

Crack your journal open again. 

Write it all out. 

Remember, this is not some breezy stroll through your personal trophy room. 

Don’tjust write down your achievement hit list. 

Include life obstacles you’ve overcome aswell, like quitting smoking or overcoming depression or a stutter. 

Add in thoseminor tasks you failed earlier in life, but tried again a second or third time andultimately succeeded at. 

Feel what it was like to overcome those struggles, thoseopponents, and win. 

Then get to work. 

Set ambitious goals before each workout and let those past victories carry you tonew personal bests. 

If it’s a run or bike ride, include some time to do interval workand challenge yourself to beat your best mile split. 

Or simply maintain a maximumheart rate for a full minute, then two minutes. 

If you’re at home, focus on pull-upsor push-ups. 

Do as many as possible in two minutes. 

Then try to beat your best. 

When the pain hits and tries to stop you short of your goal, dunk your fist in, pullout a cookie, and let it fuel you!If you’re more focused on intellectual growth, train yourself to study harder andlonger than ever before, or read a record number of books in a given month. 

YourCookie Jar can help there too. 

Because if you perform this challenge correctly andtruly challenge yourself, you’ll come to a point in any exercise where pain,boredom, or self-doubt kicks in, and you’ll need to push back to get through it. 

TheCookie Jar is your shortcut to taking control of your own thought process. 

Use itthat way! The point here isn’t to make yourself feel like a hero for the fuck of it. 

It’snot a hooray-for-me session. 

It’s to remember what a badass you are so you can usethat energy to succeed again in the heat of battle!Post your memories and the new successes they fueled on social media, and includethe hashtags: #canthurtme #cookiejar. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com   CHAPTER SEVEN  7. 

THE MOST POWERFUL WEAPONTwenty-seven hours after savoring intense, gratifying pain and basking in theafterglow of my greatest achievement so far, I was back at my desk on a Mondaymorning. 

SBG was my commanding officer, and I had his permission, and everyknown excuse, to take a few days off. 

Instead, swollen, sore, and miserable, I pulledmyself out of bed, hobbled into work, and later that morning called Chris Kostman. 

I’d been looking forward to this. 

I imagined the sweet note of surprise in his voice,after hearing that I’d taken his challenge and run 101 miles in less than twenty-fourhours. 

Perhaps there’d even be some overdue respect as he made my entry toBadwater official. 

Instead, my call went to voicemail. 

I left him a polite message henever returned, and two days later I dropped him an email. 

Sir, how are you doing? I ran the one hundred miles needed to qualify in 18  hours and 56 minutes…I would like to know now what I need to do to get into  Badwater…so we can begin raising money for the [Special Operations Warrior]  foundation. 

Thanks again…His reply came in the next day, and it threw me way the fuck off. 

Congrats on your hundred-mile finish. 

But did you actually stop then? The point  of a twenty-four-hour event is to run for twenty-four hours…Anyway…stay  tuned for the announcement that you can apply…The race will be July 24–26. 

Best regards,  Chris KostmanI couldn’t help but take his response personally. 

On a Wednesday he suggested I runone hundred miles in twenty-four hours that Saturday. 

I got it done in less time thanhe required, and he still wasn’t impressed? Kostman was a veteran of ultra races, sohe knew that strewn behind me were a dozen performance barriers and painthresholds I’d shattered. 

Obviously, none of that meant much to him. 

I cooled off for a week before I wrote him back, and in the meantime looked intoother races to bolster my resume. 

There were very few available that late in theyear. 

I found a fifty-miler on Catalina, but only triple digits would impress a guylike Kostman. 

Plus, it had been a full week since the San Diego One Day and mybody was still monumentally fucked. 

I hadn’t run three feet since finishing mile101. 

My frustration flashed with the cursor as I crafted my rebuttal. 

   Thanks for emailing me back. 

I see that you enjoy talking about as much as I  do. 

The only reason why I’m still bugging you is because this race and the cause  behind it is important…If you have any other qualifying races that you think I  should do, please let me know…Thanks for letting me know I’m supposed to  run the full twenty-four hours. 

Next time I’ll be sure to do that. 

It took him another full week to respond, and he didn’t offer a hell of a lot morehope, but at least he salted it with sarcasm. 

Hi David,  If you can do some more ultras between now and Jan 3–24, the application  period, great. 

If not, submit the best possible application during the Jan 3–24  window and cross your fingers. 

Thanks for your enthusiasm,  ChrisAt this point I was starting to like Chris Kostman a lot better than my chances ofgetting into Badwater. 

What I didn’t know, because he never mentioned it, is thatKostman was one of five people on the Badwater admissions committee, whichreviews upwards of 1,000 applications a year. 

Each judge scores every application,and based on their cumulative scores, the top ninety applicants get in on merit. 

From the sounds of it, my resume was thin and wouldn’t crack the top ninety. 

Onthe other hand, Kostman held ten wild cards in his back pocket. 

He could havealready guaranteed me a spot, but for some reason he kept pushing me. 

Once againI’d have to prove myself beyond a minimum standard to get a fair shake. 

To becomea SEAL, I had to deal with three Hell Weeks, and now, if I really wanted to runBadwater and raise money for families in need, I was going to have to find a way tomake my application bulletproof. 

Based on a link he sent along with his reply, I found one more ultra race scheduledbefore the Badwater application was due. 

It was called the Hurt 100, and the namedid not lie. 

One of the toughest 100-mile trail races in the world, it was set in atriple canopy rainforest on the island of Oahu. 

To cross the finish line, I’d have torun up and down 24,500 vertical feet. 

That’s some Himalayan shit. 

I stared at therace profile. 

It was all sharp spikes and deep dives. 

It looked like an arrhythmicEKG. 

I couldn’t do this race cold. 

There’s no way I could finish it without at leastsome training, but by early December I was still in so much agony that walking upthe stairs to my apartment was pure torture. 

The following weekend I zoomed up Interstate 15 to Vegas for the Las VegasMarathon. 

It wasn’t spur of the moment. 

Months before I’d ever heard the words“San Diego One Day,” Kate, my mom, and I had circled December 5th on ourcalendars. 

It was 2005, the first year that the Las Vegas Marathon started on theStrip, and we wanted to be part of that shit. 

Except I never trained for it, then theSan Diego One Day happened, and by the time we got to Vegas I had no illusionsabout my fitness level. 

I tried to run the morning before we left, but I still had stressfractures in my feet, my medial tendons were wobbly, and even while wrapped witha special bandage I’d found that could stabilize my ankles, I couldn’t last longerthan a quarter mile. 

So I didn’t plan on running as we rocked up to the Mandalay Bay Casino & Resort on race day. 

It was a beautiful morning. 

Music was pumping, there were thousands of smilingfaces in the street, the clean desert air had a chill to it, and the sun was shining. 

Running conditions don’t get much better, and Kate was ready to go. 

Her goal wasto break five hours, and for once, I was satisfied being a cheerleader. 

My mom hadalways planned on walking it, and I figured I’d stroll with her for as long as I could,then hail a cab to the finish line and cheer my ladies to the tape. 

The three of us toed up with the masses as the clock struck 7 a. 

m. 

, and someone goton the mic to begin the official count down. 

“Ten…nine…eight…” When he hitone, a horn sounded, and like Pavlov’s dog something clicked inside me. 

I stilldon’t know what it was. 

Perhaps I underestimated my competitive spirit. 

Maybe itwas because I knew Navy SEALs were supposed to be the hardest motherfuckers inthe world. 

We were supposed to run on broken legs and fractured feet. 

Or so wentthe legend I’d bought into long ago. 

Whatever it was, something triggered and thelast thing I remember seeing as the horn echoed down the street was shock and realconcern on the faces of Kate and my mother as I charged down the boulevard andout of sight. 

The pain was serious for the first quarter mile, but after that adrenaline took over. 

Ihit the first mile marker at 7:10 and kept running like the asphalt was meltingbehind me. 

Ten kilometers into the race, my time was around forty-three minutes. 

That’s solid, but I wasn’t focused on the clock because considering how I’d felt theday before, I was still in total disbelief that I’d actually run 6. 

2 miles! My body wasbroken. 

How was this happening? Most people in my condition would have bothfeet in soft casts, and here I was running a marathon!I got to mile thirteen, the halfway point, and saw the official clock. 

It read,“1:35:55. 

” I did the math and realized that I was in the hunt to qualify for theBoston marathon, but was right on the cusp. 

In order to qualify in my age group, Ihad to finish in under 3:10:59. 

I laughed in disbelief and slammed a paper cup ofGatorade. 

In less than two hours the game had flipped, and I might never get thischance again. 

I’d seen so much death by then—in my personal life and on thebattlefield—that I knew tomorrow was not guaranteed. 

Before me was anopportunity, and if you give me an opportunity, I will break that motherfucker off!It wasn’t easy. 

I’d surfed an adrenaline wave for the first thirteen miles, but I feltevery inch of the second half, and at mile eighteen, I hit a wall. 

That’s a commontheme in marathon running, because mile eighteen is usually when a runner’sglycogen levels run low, and I was bonking, my lungs heaving. 

My legs felt like Iwas running in deep Saharan sand. 

I needed to stop and take a break, but I refused,and two hard miles later I felt rejuvenated. 

I reached the next clock at mile twenty-two. 

I was still in the hunt for Boston, though I’d fallen thirty seconds off the pace,and to qualify, the final four miles would have to be my very best. 

I dug deep, kicked my thighs up high, and lengthened my stride. 

I was a manpossessed as I turned the final corner and charged toward the finish line at theMandalay Bay. 

Thousands of people had assembled on the sidewalk, cheering. 

Itwas all a beautiful blur to me as I sprinted home. 

 I ran my last two miles at a sub-seven-minute pace, finished the race in just over3:08, and qualified for Boston. 

Somewhere on the streets of Las Vegas, my wife andmother would deal with their own struggles and overcome them to finish too, and asI sat on a patch of grass, waiting for them, I contemplated another simple question Icouldn’t shake. 

It was a new one, and wasn’t fear-based, pain-spiked, or self-limiting. 

This one felt open. 

What am I capable of?SEAL training had pushed me to the brink several times, but whenever it beat medown I popped up to take another pounding. 

That experience made me hard, but italso left me wanting more of the same, and day-to-day Navy SEAL life just wasn’tlike that. 

Then came the San Diego One Day, and now this. 

I’d finished a marathonat an elite pace (for a weekend warrior) when I had no business even walking amile. 

Both were incredible physical feats that didn’t seem possible. 

But they’dhappened. 

What am I capable of?I couldn’t answer that question, but as I looked around the finish line that day andconsidered what I’d accomplished, it became clear that we are all leaving a lot ofmoney on the table without realizing it. 

We habitually settle for less than our best; atwork, in school, in our relationships, and on the playing field or race course. 

Wesettle as individuals, and we teach our children to settle for less than their best, andall of that ripples out, merges, and multiplies within our communities and society asa whole. 

We’re not talking some bad weekend in Vegas, no more cash at the ATMkind of loss either. 

In that moment, the cost of missing out on so much excellence inthis eternally fucked-up world felt incalculable to me, and it still does. 

I haven’tstopped thinking about it since. 

***Physically, I bounced back from Vegas within a few days. 

Meaning I was back tomy new normal: dealing with the same serious yet tolerable pain I’d come home toafter the San Diego One Day. 

The aches were still there by the following Saturday,but I was done convalescing. 

I needed to start training or I’d burn out on the trailduring the Hurt 100, and there would be no Badwater. 

I’d been reading up on howto prepare for ultras and knew it was vital to get in some hundred-mile weeks. 

Ionly had about a month to build my strength and endurance before race day onJanuary 14th. 

My feet and shins weren’t even close to right, so I came up with a new method tostabilize both the bones in my feet and my tendons. 

I bought high performanceinserts, cut them down to fit flush with the soles of my feet, and taped my ankles,heels, and lower shins with compression tape. 

I also slid a small heel wedge into myshoes to correct my running posture and ease pressure. 

After what I’d endured, ittook a lot of props to get me running (nearly) pain free. 

Getting hundred-mile weeks in while holding down a steady job isn’t easy, but thatwas no excuse. 

My sixteen-mile commute to work from Chula Vista to Coronadobecame my go-to run. 

Chula Vista had a split personality when I lived there. 

There was the nicer, newer, middle class section, where we lived, which was surroundedby a concrete jungle of gritty, dangerous streets. 

That’s the part I ran through atdawn, beneath freeway overpasses, and alongside Home Depot shipping bays. 

Thiswas not your tourist brochure’s version of sunny San Diego. 

I sniffed car exhaust and rotting garbage, spotted skittering rats, and dodgedsleepless homeless camps before reaching Imperial Beach, where I picked up theseven-mile Silver Strand bike path. 

It banked south past Coronado’s landmark hotel,the turn of the century Hotel Del Coronado, and a crop of luxury condo towerswhich overlooked the same wide strip of sand shared by Naval Special WarfareCommand, where I spent the day jumping out of airplanes and shooting guns. 

I wasliving the Navy SEAL legend, trying to keep it real!I ran that sixteen-mile stretch at least three times a week. 

Some days I ran home too,and on Fridays I added a ruck run. 

Inside the radio pouch of my standard issue rucksack, I slid two twenty-five-pound weights and ran fully loaded for as many astwenty miles to build quad strength. 

I loved waking up at 5 a. 

m. 

and starting workwith three hours of cardio already in the bank while most of my teammates hadn’teven finished their coffee. 

It gave me a mental edge, a better sense of self-awareness, and a ton of self-confidence, which made me a better SEAL instructor. 

That’s what getting up at the ass crack of dawn and putting out will do for you. 

Itmakes you better in all facets of your life. 

During my first real deal week of training, I ran seventy-seven miles. 

The followingweek, I ran 109 miles, including a twelve-mile run on Christmas Day. 

The nextweek I pushed it to 111. 

5, including a nineteen-mile run on New Year’s Day, andthe following week I backed off to taper my legs, but still got 56. 

5 miles in. 

All ofthose were road miles, but what I had coming up was a trail run, and I had never runon a trail before. 

I’d bushwhacked a bunch, but I hadn’t run distance on single trackwith a clock running. 

The Hurt 100 was a twenty-mile circuit course, and I’d heardthat only a slim slice of those who start the race finish all five laps. 

This was my lastchance to pad my Badwater resume. 

I had a lot riding on a successful outcome, andthere was so much about the race, and about ultra running, that I still didn’t know. 

    Hurt 100 Week 3 training logI flew into Honolulu a few days early and checked into the Halekoa, a military hotelwhere active duty and veterans stay with their families when they come throughtown. 

I’d studied the maps and knew the basics when it came to the terrain, but Ihadn’t seen it up close, so I drove over to the Hawaii Nature Center the day beforethe race and stared into the velvety, jade mountains. 

All I could see was a steep cutof red earth disappearing into the dense green. 

I walked up the trail for a half mile,but there was only so far I could hike. 

I was tapering, and the first mile was straightuphill. 

Everything beyond that would have to remain a mystery for a little longer. 

 There were just three aid stations on the twenty-mile course, and most athletes wereself-reliant and dialed in their own nutritional regimen. 

I was still a neophyte, andhad no clue what I needed when it came to fuel. 

I met a woman at the hotel at 5:30a. 

m. 

on race day morning as we were about to leave. 

She knew I was a rookie andasked what I’d brought with me to keep myself going. 

I showed her my meagerstash of flavored energy gels, and my CamelBak. 

“You didn’t bring salt pills?” she asked, shocked. 

I shrugged. 

I didn’t know whatthe fuck a salt pill was. 

She poured a hundred of them into my palm. 

“Take two ofthese, every hour. 

They’ll keep you from cramping. 

”“Roger that. 

” She smiled and shook her head like she could see my fucked-upfuture. 

I had a strong start and felt great, but not long after the race began I knew I wasfacing a monster course. 

I’m not talking about the grade and elevation variance. 

Iexpected that. 

It was all the rocks and roots that took me by surprise. 

I was luckythat it hadn’t rained in a couple of days because all I had to wear were my standardrunning shoes, which had precious little tread. 

Then my CamelBak broke at milesix. 

I shook it off and kept hammering, but without a water source, I’d have to rely onthe aid stations to hydrate, and they were spaced miles apart. 

I didn’t even have mysupport crew (of one) yet. 

Kate was chilling on the beach and didn’t plan onshowing up until later in the race, which was was my own fault. 

I enticed her tocome along by promising a vacation, and early that morning I insisted she enjoyHawaii and leave the suffering to me. 

With or without a CamelBak, my mindset wasto make it from aid station to aid station and see what happens. 

Before the race started I heard people talking about Karl Meltzer. 

I’d seen himstretching out and warming up. 

His nickname was the Speedgoat, and he was tryingto become the first person ever to complete the race in less than twenty-four hours. 

For the rest of us there was a thirty-six hour time limit. 

My first lap took four and ahalf hours, and I felt okay afterwards, which was to be expected considering all thelong days I’d done in preparation, but I was also concerned because each lapdemanded an ascent and descent of around 5,000 vertical feet, and the amount offocus it took to pay attention to every step so I didn’t turn an ankle amped up mymental fatigue. 

Each time my medial tendon twinged it felt like a raw nerveexposed to the wind, and I knew one stumble could fold my wobbly ankle and endmy race. 

I felt that pressure every single moment, and as a result, I burned morecalories than expected. 

Which was a problem because I had very little fuel, andwithout a water source, I couldn’t hydrate effectively. 

Between laps, I guzzled water, and with my belly sloshing started my second loop,with a slow jog up that one-mile-long, 800-foot climb into the mountains (basicallystraight uphill). 

That’s when it started to rain. 

Our red earth trail became mud withinminutes. 

The soles of my shoes were coated with it and slick as skis. 

I sloshedthrough shin deep puddles, skidded down descents, and slipped on ascents. 

It was afull-body sport. 

But at least there was water. 

Whenever I was dry I tipped my headback, opened wide, and tasted the rain, which filtered through a triple canopy junglethat smelled of leaf rot and shit. 

The feral funk of fertility invaded my nostrils, andall I could think of was the fact that I had to run four more fucking laps! At mile thirty, my body reported some positive news. 

Or maybe it was the physicalmanifestation of a backhanded compliment? The tendon pain in my ankles hadvanished…because my feet had swollen enough to stabilize those tendons. 

Was thisa good thing long-term? Probably not, but you take what you can get on the ultracircuit, where you have to roll with whatever gets you from mile to mile. 

Meanwhile, my quads and calves ached like they’d been thumped with asledgehammer. 

Yeah, I had done a lot of running, but most of it—including my ruckruns—on pancake flat terrain in San Diego, not on slick jungle trails. 

Kate was waiting for me by the time I completed my second lap, and after spendinga relaxing morning on Waikiki beach, she watched in horror as I materialized fromthe mist like a zombie from the Walking Dead. 

I sat and guzzled as much water as Icould. 

By then, word had gotten out that it was my first trail race. 

Have you ever had a very public fuck-up, or were in the midst of a shittyday/week/month/year, yet people around you felt obliged to comment on the sourceof your humiliation? Maybe they reminded you of all the ways you could haveensured a very different outcome? Now imagine consuming that negativity, buthaving to run sixty more miles in the sweaty, jungle rain on top of it. 

Does thatsound like fun? Yeah, I was the talk of the race. 

Well, me and Karl Meltzer. 

Nobodycould believe he was gunning for a sub-twenty-four-hour experience, and it wasequally baffling that I showed up to one of the most treacherous trail races on theplanet, undersupplied and unprepared, with no trail races under my belt. 

By the timeI began my third loop there were only forty athletes, out of nearly a hundred, left inthe race, and I started running with a guy named Luis Escobar. 

For the tenth time Iheard the following words:“So it’s your first trail race?” he asked. 

I nodded. 

“You really picked the wrong…”“I know,” I said. 

“It’s just such a technical…”“Right. 

I’m a fucking idiot. 

I’ve heard that a lot today. 

”“That’s okay,” he said, “we’re all of bunch of idiots out here, man. 

” He handed mea water bottle. 

He was carrying three of them. 

“Take this. 

I heard about yourCamelBak. 

”This being my second race, I was starting to understand the rhythm of ultra. 

It’s aconstant dance between competition and camaraderie, which reminded me ofBUD/S. 

Luis and I were both racing the clock and each other, but we wanted oneanother to make it. 

We were in it alone, together, and he was right. 

We were acouple of fucking idiots. 

Darkness descended and left us with a pitch-black jungle night. 

Running side byside, the glow of our headlamps merged and shed a wider light, but once weseparated all I could see was a yellow ball bouncing on the trail ahead of me. 

Countless trip wires—shin-high logs, slick roots, lichen-wrapped rocks—remainedout of sight. 

I slipped, stumbled, fell, and cursed. 

Jungle noises were everywhere. 

Itwasn’t just the insect world that had my attention. 

In Hawaii, on all the islands, bowhunting for wild pig in the mountains is a major pastime, and master hunters often leave their pit bulls chained up in the jungle to develop a nose for swine. 

I heardevery one of those hungry bulls snapping and growling, and I heard some pigssquealing too. 

I smelled their fear and rage, their piss and shit, their sour fuckingbreath. 

With each nearby bark or yelp, my heart skipped and I jumped on terrain so slickthat injury was a real possibility. 

One wrong step could roll my ass out of the raceand out of contention for Badwater. 

I could picture Kostman hearing the news andnodding like he figured that shit would happen all along. 

I know him pretty wellnow, and he was never out to get me, but that’s how my mind worked back then. 

And in the steep, dark mountains of Oahu, my exhaustion magnified my stress. 

Ifelt close to my absolute limit, but still had more than forty miles to go!On the backside of the course, after a long technical descent into the dark, dankforest I saw another headlamp circling ahead of me in a cutout on the trail. 

Therunner was moving in curlicues and when I caught up to him I could see it was aHungarian runner I’d met in San Diego named Akos Konya. 

He was one of the bestrunners in the field on Hospitality Point, where he covered 134 miles in twenty-fourhours. 

I liked Akos and had mad respect for him. 

I stopped and watched him movein conjoining circles, covering the same terrain over and over again. 

Was he lookingfor something? Was he hallucinating?“Akos,” I asked, “you okay, man? Do you need some help?”“David, no! I…no, I’m fine,” he said. 

His eyes were full-moon flying saucers. 

Hewas in delirium, but I was barely hanging on myself and wasn’t sure what I coulddo for him other than tell staff at the next aid station he was wandering in a daze. 

Like I said, there’s camaraderie and there’s competition on the ultra circuit, andsince he wasn’t in obvious pain and refused my help, I had to go into barbarianmode. 

With two full laps to go, I had no choice but to keep moving. 

I staggered back to the start line and slumped into my chair, dazed. 

It was dark asspace, the temperature was dropping, and rain was still pissing down. 

I was at thevery edge of my capability, and wasn’t sure that I could take one more step. 

I feltlike I’d drained 99 percent from my tank, at least. 

My gas light was on, my engineshuddering, yet I knew I had to find more if I was going to finish this race and getmyself into Badwater. 

But how do you push yourself when pain is all you feel with every step? Whenagony is the feedback loop that permeates each cell in your body, begging you tostop? That’s tricky because the threshold for suffering is different for everybody. 

What’s universal is the impulse to succumb. 

To feel like you’ve given everythingyou can, and that you are justified in leaving a job undone. 

By now, I’m sure you can tell that it doesn’t take much for me to become obsessed. 

Some criticize my level of passion, but I’m not down with the prevailing mentalitiesthat tend to dominate American society these days; the ones that tell us to go withthe flow or invite us to learn how to get more with less effort. 

Fuck that shortcutbullshit. 

The reason I embrace my own obsessions and demand and desire more ofmyself is because I’ve learned that it’s only when I push beyond pain and suffering,past my perceived limitations, that I’m capable of accomplishing more, physicallyand mentally—in endurance races but also in life as a whole. 

 And I believe the same is true for you. 

The human body is like a stock car. 

We may look different on the outside, but underthe hood we all have huge reservoirs of potential and a governor impeding us fromreaching our maximum velocity. 

In a car, the governor limits the flow of fuel and airso it doesn’t burn too hot, which places a ceiling on performance. 

It’s a hardwareissue; the governor can easily be removed, and if you disable yours, watch your carrocket beyond 130 mph. 

It’s a subtler process in the human animal. 

Our governor is buried deep in our minds, intertwined with our very identity. 

Itknows what and who we love and hate; it’s read our whole life story and forms theway we see ourselves and how we’d like to be seen. 

It’s the software that deliverspersonalized feedback—in the form of pain and exhaustion, but also fear andinsecurity, and it uses all of that to encourage us to stop before we risk it all. 

But,here’s the thing, it doesn’t have absolute control. 

Unlike the governor in an engine,ours can’t stop us unless we buy into its bullshit and agree to quit. 

Sadly, most of us give up when we’ve only given around 40 percent of ourmaximum effort. 

Even when we feel like we’ve reached our absolute limit, we stillhave 60 percent more to give! That’s the governor in action! Once you know that tobe true, it’s simply a matter of stretching your pain tolerance, letting go of youridentity and all your self-limiting stories, so you can get to 60 percent, then 80percent and beyond without giving up. 

I call this The 40% Rule, and the reason it’sso powerful is that if you follow it, you will unlock your mind to new levels ofperformance and excellence in sports and in life, and your rewards will run fardeeper than mere material success. 

The 40% Rule can be applied to everything we do. 

Because in life almost nothingwill turn out exactly as we hope. 

There are always challenges, and whether we areat work or school, or feeling tested within our most intimate or importantrelationships, we will all be tempted to walk away from commitments, give up onour goals and dreams, and sell our own happiness short at some point. 

Because wewill feel empty, like we have no more to give, when we haven’t tapped even half ofthe treasure buried deep in our minds, hearts, and souls. 

I know how it feels to be approaching an energetic dead end. 

I’ve been there toomany times to count. 

I understand the temptation to sell short, but I also know thatimpulse is driven by your mind’s desire for comfort, and it’s not telling you thetruth. 

It’s your identity trying to find sanctuary, not help you grow. 

It’s looking forstatus quo, not reaching for greatness or seeking wholeness. 

But the software updatethat you need to shut your governor down is no supersonic download. 

It takestwenty years to gain twenty years of experience, and the only way to move beyondyour 40 percent is to callous your mind, day after day. 

Which means you’ll have tochase pain like it’s your damn job!Imagine you’re a boxer, and on your first day in the ring you take one on your chin. 

It’s gonna hurt like fucking hell, but at year ten of being a boxer, you won’t bestopped by one punch. 

You’ll be able to absorb twelve rounds of getting beat thefuck down and come back the very next day and fight again. 

It’s not that the punchhas lost power. 

Your opponents will be even stronger. 

The change has happened within your brain. 

You’ve calloused your mind. 

Over a period of time, yourtolerance for mental and physical suffering will have expanded because yoursoftware will have learned that you can take a hell of a lot more than one punch,and if you stay with any task that is trying to beat you down, you will reap rewards. 

Not a fighter? Say you like to run but have a broken pinky toe. 

I’ll bet if youcontinue running on it, pretty soon you’ll be able to run on broken legs. 

Soundsimpossible, right? I know it’s true, because I’ve run on broken legs, and thatknowledge helped me endure all manner of agonies on the ultra circuit, which hasrevealed a clear spring of self confidence that I drink from whenever my tank is dry. 

But nobody taps their reserve 60 percent right away or all at once. 

The first step isto remember that your initial blast of pain and fatigue is your governor talking. 

Once you do that, you are in control of the dialogue in your mind, and you canremind yourself that you are not as drained as you think. 

That you haven’t given ityour all. 

Not even close. 

Buying into that will keep you in the fight, and that’sworth an extra 5 percent. 

Of course, that’s easier read than done. 

It wasn’t easy to begin the fourth lap of the Hurt 100 because I knew how much itwould hurt, and when you are feeling dead and buried, dehydrated, wrung out, andtorn the fuck up at 40 percent, finding that extra 60 percent feels impossible. 

Ididn’t want my suffering to continue. 

Nobody does! That’s why the line “fatiguemakes cowards of us all” is true as shit. 

Mind you, I didn’t know anything about The 40% Rule that day. 

The Hurt 100 iswhen I first started to contemplate it, but I had hit the wall many times before, and Ihad learned to stay present and open minded enough to recalibrate my goals even atmy lowest. 

I knew that staying in the fight is always the hardest, and mostrewarding, first step. 

Of course, it’s easy to be open minded when you leave yoga class and are taking astroll by the beach, but when you’re suffering, keeping an open mind is hard work. 

The same is true if you are facing a daunting challenge on the job or at school. 

Maybe you are tackling a hundred-question test and know that you’ve bricked thefirst fifty. 

At that point, it’s extremely difficult to maintain the necessary disciplineto force yourself to keep taking the test seriously. 

It’s also imperative that you findit because in every failure there is something to be gained, even if it’s only practicefor the next test you’ll have to take. 

Because that next test is coming. 

That’s aguarantee. 

I didn’t start my fourth lap with any sort of conviction. 

I was in wait-and-see mode,and halfway up that first climb I became so dizzy I had to sit under a tree for awhile. 

Two runners passed me, one at a time. 

They checked in but I waved them on. 

Told them I was just fine. 

Yeah, I was doing great. 

I was a regular Akos Konya. 

From my vantage point I could see the crest of the hill above and encouragedmyself to walk at least that far. 

If I still wanted to quit after that, I told myself that Iwould be willing to sign off, and that there is no shame in not finishing the Hurt100. 

I said that to myself again and again because that’s how our governor works. 

Itmassages your ego even as it stops you short of your goals. 

But once I got to the top of the climb, the higher ground gave me a new perspective and I saw another placeoff in the distance and decided to cover that small stretch of mud, rock, and root too—you know, before quitting for good. 

Once I got there I was staring down a long descent and even though the footing wastroubling, it still looked much easier than going uphill. 

Without realizing it, I’dgotten to a point where I was able to strategize. 

On the first climb, I was so dizzyand weak I was swept into a moment of fuck, which clogged my brain. 

There wasno room for strategy. 

I just wanted to quit, but by moving a little bit further I’d resetmy brain. 

I’d calmed down and realized I could chunk the race down to size, andstaying in the game like that gave me hope, and hope is addictive. 

I chunked the race out that way, collecting 5 percent chips, unlocking more energy,then burning it up as time bled into the wee hours. 

I became so tired I damn nearfell asleep on my feet, and that’s dangerous on a trail with so many switchbacks anddrop offs. 

Any runner could have easily sleepwalked into oblivion. 

The one thingkeeping me awake was the piss-poor trail condition. 

I fell on my ass dozens oftimes. 

My street shoes were out of their element. 

It felt like I was running on ice,and the inevitable fall was always jarring, but at least it woke me up. 

By running a little while, then walking a stretch, I was able to forge ahead to mileseventy-seven, the toughest descent of them all, which is when I saw Karl Meltzer,the Speedgoat, crest the hill behind me. 

He wore a lamp on his head and another onhis wrist, and a hip pack with two big water bottles. 

Silhouetted in pink dawn lighthe charged down slope, navigating a section that had me stumbling and groping fortree branches to stay upright. 

He was about to lap me, three miles from the finishline, on pace for a course record, twenty-two hours and sixteen minutes, but what Iremember most is how graceful he looked running at an incredible 6:30 per milepace. 

He was levitating over the mud, riding a whole different Zen. 

His feet barelytouched the ground, and it was a beautiful fucking sight. 

The Speedgoat was theliving, breathing answer to the question that colonized my mind after the Las Vegasmarathon. 

What am I capable of?Watching that bad man glide across the most challenging terrain made me realizethat there is a whole other level of athlete out there in the world, and that some ofthat was inside me too. 

In fact, it’s in all of us. 

I’m not saying that genetics don’tplay a role in athletic performance, or that everyone has an undiscovered ability torun a four-minute mile, dunk like LeBron James, shoot like Steph Curry, or run theHurt 100 in twenty-two hours. 

We don’t all have the same floor or ceiling, but weeach have a lot more in us than we know, and when it comes to endurance sportslike ultra running, everyone can achieve feats they once thought impossible. 

Inorder to do that we must change our minds, be willing to scrap our identity, andmake the extra effort to always find more in order to become more. 

We must remove our governor. 

That day on the Hurt 100 circuit, after seeing Meltzer run like a superhero, Ifinished my fourth lap in all kinds of pain and took time to watch him celebrate,surrounded by his team. 

He’d just achieved something nobody had ever done beforeand here I was with another full lap to go. 

My legs were rubber, my feet swollen. 

I did not want to go on, but I also knew that was my pain talking. 

My true potentialwas still undetermined. 

Looking back, I’d say I’d given 60 percent, which meantmy tank was just shy of half-full. 

I’d like to sit here and tell you I went all-out and drained that fucker on lap five, butI was still a mere tourist on planet ultra. 

I wasn’t the master of my mind. 

I was inthe laboratory, still in discovery mode, and I walked every single step of my fifthand final lap. 

It took me eight hours, but the rain had stopped, the tropical glow ofthe warm Hawaiian sun felt phenomenal, and I got the job done. 

I finished Hurt 100in thirty-three hours and twenty-three minutes, just shy of the thirty-six-hour cutoff, good enough for ninth place. 

Only twenty-three athletes finished the entire race,and I was one of them. 

I was so thrashed afterward, two people carried me to the car, and Kate had to spinme up to my room in a damn wheelchair. 

When we got there, we had more work todo. 

I wanted to get my Badwater application done ASAP, so without so much as acat nap, we polished that shit up. 

Within a matter of days, Kostman emailed me to let me know that I had beenaccepted into Badwater. 

It was a great feeling. 

It also meant that for the next sixmonths I had two full-time jobs. 

I was a Navy SEAL in full preparation mode forBadwater. 

This time I would get strategic and specific because I knew that in orderto unleash my best performance—if I wanted to blow past 40 percent, drain mytank, and tap my full potential—I had to first give myself an opportunity. 

I didn’t research or prepare for the Hurt 100 well enough. 

I hadn’t anticipated therough terrain, I had no support crew for the first part of the race, and I had no back-up water source. 

I didn’t bring two headlamps, which would have helped during thelong, bleak night, and though I sure felt like I had given everything I had, I nevereven had a chance to access my true 100 percent. 

Badwater was going to be different. 

I researched day and night. 

I studied the course,noted temperature and elevation variances, and charted them out. 

I wasn’t justinterested in the air temperature. 

I drilled down deeper so I knew how hot thepavement would be on the hottest Death Valley day ever. 

I Googled videos of therace and watched them for hours. 

I read blogs from runners who completed it, notedtheir pitfalls and training techniques. 

I drove north to Death Valley and explored theentire course. 

Seeing the terrain up close revealed its brutality. 

The first forty-two miles were deadflat—a run through God’s blast furnace cranked up high. 

That would be my bestopportunity to make great time, but to survive it, I’d need two crew vehicles to leapfrog one another and set up cooling stations every third of a mile. 

The thought of itthrilled me, but then again, I wasn’t living it yet. 

I was listening to music, windowsdown on a spring day in a blooming desert. 

I was comfortable as hell! It was all stilla fucked-up fantasy!I marked off the best spots to set up my cooling stations. 

I noted wherever theshoulder was wide, and where stopping would have to be avoided. 

I also took noteof gas stations and other places to fill up on water and buy ice. 

There weren’t manyof them, but they were all mapped. 

After running the desert gauntlet I’d earn somerelief from the heat and pay for it with altitude. 

The next stage of the race was an eighteen-mile climb to Towne Pass at 4,800 feet. 

The sun would be setting by thenand after driving that section, I pulled over, closed my eyes, and visualized it all. 

Research is one part of preparation; visualization is another. 

Following that TownePass climb, I would face a bone-crushing, nine-mile descent. 

I could see it unfurlfrom the top of the pass. 

One thing I learned from the Hurt 100 is that runningdownhill fucks you up bad, and this time I’d be doing it on asphalt. 

I closed myeyes, opened my mind, and tried to feel the pain in my quads and calves, knees andshins. 

I knew my quads would bear the brunt of that descent, so I made a note toadd muscle. 

My thighs would need to be plated in steel. 

The eighteen-mile climb up Darwin Pass from mile seventy-two would be pure hell. 

I’d have to run-walk that section, but the sun would be down, I’d welcome the chillin Lone Pine, and from there I could make up some time because that’s where theroad flattened out again before the final thirteen-mile climb up Whitney PortalRoad, to the finish line at 8,374 feet. 

Then again, it’s easy to write “make up time” in your notepad, and another toexecute it when you get there in real life, but at least I had notes. 

Together with myannotated maps, they made up my Badwater file, which I studied like I waspreparing for another ASVAB test. 

I sat at my kitchen table, read and re-read them,and visualized each mile the best I could, but I also knew that my body still hadn’trecovered from Hawaii, which hampered the other, even more important aspect ofmy Badwater prep: physical training. 

I was in dire need of PT, but my tendons still hurt so bad I couldn’t run for months. 

Pages were flying off the calendar. 

I needed to get harder and become the strongestrunner possible, and the fact that I couldn’t train like I’d hoped sapped myconfidence. 

Plus, word had gotten out at work about what I was getting myself into,and while I had some support from fellow SEALs, I got my share of negativity too,especially when they found out I still couldn’t run. 

But that was nothing new. 

Whohasn’t dreamed up a possibility for themselves only to have friends, colleagues, orfamily shit all over it? Most of us are motivated as hell to do anything to pursue ourdreams until those around us remind us of the danger, the downside, our ownlimitations, and all the people before us that didn’t make it. 

Sometimes the advicecomes from a well-intentioned place. 

They really believe they are doing it for ourown good but if you let them, these same people will talk you out of your dreams,and your governor will help them do it. 

That’s one reason I invented the Cookie Jar. 

We must create a system thatconstantly reminds us who the fuck we are when we are at our best, because life isnot going to pick us up when we fall. 

There will be forks in the road, knives in yourfucking back, mountains to climb, and we are only capable of living up to the imagewe create for ourselves. 

Prepare yourself!We know life can be hard, and yet we feel sorry for ourselves when it isn’t fair. 

From this point forward, accept the following as Goggins’ laws of nature:  • You will be made fun of. 

• You will feel insecure. 

   • You may not be the best all the time. 

• You may be the only black, white, Asian, Latino, female, male, gay, lesbian   or [fill in your identity here] in a given situation. 

• There will be times when you feel alone. 

Get over it!Our minds are fucking strong, they are our most powerful weapon, but we havestopped using them. 

We have access to so many more resources today than everbefore and yet we are so much less capable than those who came before us. 

If youwant to be one of the few to defy those trends in our ever-softening society, you willhave to be willing to go to war with yourself and create a whole new identity, whichrequires an open mind. 

It’s funny, being open minded is often tagged as new age orsoft. 

Fuck that. 

Being open minded enough to find a way is old school. 

It’s whatknuckle draggers do. 

And that’s exactly what I did. 

I borrowed my friend Stokes’ bike (he also graduated in Class 235), and instead ofrunning to work, I rode there and back every day. 

There was an elliptical trainer inthe brand-new SEAL Team Five gym, and I hit it once and sometimes twice a day,with five layers of clothes on! Death Valley heat scared the shit out of me, so Isimulated it. 

I suited up in three or four pairs of sweatpants, a few pull-oversweatshirts, a hoodie, and a fleece hat, all sealed up in a Gore-Tex shell. 

After twominutes on the elliptical my heart rate was at 170, and I stayed at it for two hours ata time. 

Before or after that I’d hop on the rowing machine and bang out 30,000meters—which is nearly twenty miles. 

I never did anything for ten or twentyminutes. 

My entire mindset was ultra. 

It had to be. 

Afterward I could be seenwringing my clothes out, like I’d just soaked them in a river. 

Most of the guysthought I was whacked out, but my old BUD/S instructor, SBG, fucking loved it. 

That spring I was tasked as a land warfare instructor for SEALs at our base inNiland, California; a sorry scrap of Southern California desert, its trailer parksrampant with unemployed meth heads. 

Drugged-out drifters, who filtered throughthe disintegrating settlements on the Salton Sea, an inland body of water sixty milesfrom the Mexico border, were our only neighbors. 

Whenever I passed them on thestreet while out on a ten-mile ruck, they’d stare like I was an alien that hadmaterialized into the real world from one of their speed-addled vision quests. 

Thenagain, I was dressed in three layers of clothes and a Gore-Tex jacket in peakhundred-degree heat. 

I did look like some evil messenger from the way-out beyond!By then my injuries had become manageable and I ran ten miles at a time, thenhiked the hills around Niland for hours, weighed down with a fifty-pound ruck. 

The Team guys I was training considered me an alien being too, and a few of themwere more frightened of me than the meth heads. 

They thought something hadhappened to me on the battlefield out in that other desert where war wasn’t a game. 

What they didn’t know was the battlefield for me was my own mind. 

I drove back out to Death Valley to train and did a ten-mile run in a sauna suit. 

Thatmotherfucker was hot as balls, but I had the hardest race in the world ahead of me,and I’d run a hundred miles twice. 

I knew how that felt, and the prospect of havingto take on an additional thirty-five miles petrified me. 

Sure, I talked a good game,projected all kinds of confidence, and raised tens of thousands of dollars, but part ofme didn’t know if I had what it took to finish the race, so I had to invent barbaric PT to give myself a chance. 

It takes a lot of will to push yourself when you are all alone. 

I hated getting up inthe morning knowing what the day held for me. 

It was very lonely, but I knew thaton the Badwater course I’d reach a point where the pain would become unbearableand feel insurmountable. 

Maybe it would be at mile fifty or sixty, maybe later, butthere would be a time when I’d want to quit, and I had to be able to slay the one-second decisions in order to stay in the game and access my untapped 60 percent. 

During all the lonely hours of heat training, I’d started to dissect the quitting mindand realized that if I was going to perform close to my absolute potential and makethe Warrior Foundation proud, I’d have to do more than answer the simplequestions as they came up. 

I’d have to stifle the quitting mind before it gained anytraction at all. 

Before I ever asked myself, “Why?” I’d need my Cookie Jar on recallto convince me that despite what my body was saying, I was immune to suffering. 

Because nobody quits an ultra race or Hell Week in a split second. 

People make thedecision to quit hours before they ring that bell, so I needed to be present enough torecognize when my body and mind were starting to fail in order to short circuit theimpulse to look for a way out long before I tumbled into that fatal funnel. 

Ignoringpain or blocking out the truth like I did at the San Diego One Day would not workthis time, and if you are on the hunt for your 100 percent you should catalog yourweaknesses and vulnerabilities. 

Don’t ignore them. 

Be prepared for them, becausein any endurance event, in any high-stress environment, your weaknesses willsurface like bad karma, build in volume, and overwhelm you. 

Unless you get aheadof them first. 

This is an exercise in recognition and visualization. 

You must recognize what youare about to do, highlight what you do not like about it, and spend time visualizingeach and every obstacle you can. 

I was afraid of the heat, so in the run-up toBadwater, I imagined new and more medieval self-torture rituals disguised astraining sessions (or maybe it was the other way around). 

I told myself I wasimmune to suffering, but that didn’t mean I was immune to pain. 

I hurt likeeverybody else, but I was committed to working my way around and through it so itwould not derail me. 

By the time I toed up to the line at Badwater at 6 a. 

m. 

on July22, 2006, I’d moved my governor to 80 percent. 

I’d doubled my ceiling in sixmonths, and you know what that guaranteed me?Jack fucking shit. 

Badwater has a staggered start. 

Rookies started at 6 a. 

m. 

, veteran runners had an 8a. 

m. 

start, and the true contenders wouldn’t take off until 10 a. 

m. 

, which put them inDeath Valley for peak heat. 

Chris Kostman was one hilarious son of a bitch. 

But hedidn’t know he’d given one hard motherfucker a serious tactical advantage. 

Not me. 

I’m talking about Akos Konya. 

Akos and I met up the night before at the Furnace Creek Inn, where all the athletesstayed. 

He was a first-timer too, and he looked a hell of a lot better since the lasttime we saw one another. 

Despite his issues at the Hurt 100 (he finished by the way,in 35 hours and 17 minutes), I knew Akos was a stud, and since we were both in thefirst group I let him pace me through the desert. 

Bad call! For the first seventeen miles we were side by side, and we looked like an oddcouple. 

Akos is a 5’7”, 122-pound Hungarian. 

I was the biggest man in the field at6’1”, 195 pounds, and the only black guy too. 

Akos was sponsored and dressed in acolorful, branded getup. 

I wore a torn grey tank top, black running shorts, andstreamlined Oakley sunglasses. 

My feet and ankles were wrapped in compressiontape and stuffed into broken-in but still springy running shoes. 

I didn’t wear NavySEAL gear or Warrior Foundation garb. 

I preferred to go incognito. 

I was theshadow figure filtering into a new world of pain. 

 During my first BadwaterAlthough Akos set a fast pace, the heat didn’t bother me, partly because it was earlyand because I’d heat trained so well. 

We were the two best runners in the 6 a. 

m. 

group by far, and when we passed the Furnace Creek Inn at 8:40 a. 

m. 

, some of therunners from the 10 a. 

m. 

group were outside, including Scott Jurek, the defendingchampion, Badwater record-holder, and an ultra legend. 

He must have known wewere making great time, but I’m not sure he realized that he’d just glimpsed hisstiffest competition. 

Not long after, Akos put some space between us, and at mile twenty-six, I started torealize that, once again, I went out way too fast. 

I was dizzy and lightheaded, and Iwas dealing with GI issues. 

Translation: I had to shit on the side of the road. 

All ofwhich stemmed from the fact that I was severely dehydrated. 

My mind spun withdire prognosis after dire prognosis. 

Excuses to quit piled up one after another. 

Ididn’t listen. 

I responded by taking care of my dehydration issue and poundingmore water than I wanted. 

I went through the Stovepipe Wells checkpoint at mile forty-two at 1:31 p. 

m. 

, a fullhour after Akos. 

I’d been on the race course for over seven and a half hours and wasalmost exclusively walking by then. 

I was proud just to have made it through DeathValley on my feet. 

I took a break, went to a proper bathroom, and changed myclothes. 

My feet had swollen more than I’d expected, and my right big toe had beenchafing the side of the shoe for hours, so stopping felt like sweet relief. 

I felt thebloom of a blood blister on the side of my left foot, but I knew better than to takeoff my shoes. 

Most athletes size up their shoes to run Badwater, and even then, theycut out the big toe side panel to create space for swelling and to minimize chafing. 

Idid not, and I had ninety more miles ahead of me. 

I hiked the entire eighteen-mile climb to Towne Pass at 4,850 feet. 

As predicted, thesun dropped as I crested the pass, the air cooled, and I pulled on another layer. 

Inthe military we always say we don’t rise to the level of our expectations, we fall to the level of our training, and as I hiked up the winding highway with my blisterbarking, I fell into the same rhythm I’d find on my long rucks in the desert aroundNiland. 

I wasn’t running, but I kept a strong pace and covered a lot of ground. 

I stuck to my script, ran the entire nine-mile descent, and my quads paid the price. 

So did my left foot. 

My blister was growing by the minute. 

I could feel it verging onhot-air-balloon status. 

If only it would burst through my shoe like an old cartoon,and continue to expand until it carried me into the clouds and dropped me onto thepeak of Mount Whitney itself. 

No such luck. 

I kept walking, and aside from my crew, which included, amongothers, my wife (Kate was crew chief) and mother, I didn’t see anybody else. 

I wason an eternal ruck, marching beneath a black dome sky glittering with starlight. 

I’dbeen walking for so long I expected a swarm of runners to materialize at anymoment, then leave me in their wake. 

But nobody showed. 

The only evidence oflife on planet pain was the rhythm of my own hot breath, the burn of my cartoonblister, and the high beams and red taillights of road trippers blazing trails throughthe California night. 

That is, until the sun was ready to rise and a swarm finally didarrive at mile 110. 

I was exhausted and dehydrated by then, glazed in sweat, dirt, and salt, whenhorseflies began to dive bomb me one at a time. 

Two became four which becameten and fifteen. 

They beat their wings against my skin, bit my thighs, and crawledinto my ears. 

This shit was biblical, and it was my very last test. 

My crew took turnsswatting flies off my skin with a towel. 

I was in personal best territory already. 

I’dcovered more than 110 miles on foot, and with “only” twenty-five miles to go therewas no fucking way these devil flies would stop me. 

Would they? I kept marching,and my crew kept swatting flies, for the next eight miles!Since watching Akos run away from me after mile seventeen, I hadn’t seen anotherBadwater runner until mile 122 when Kate pulled up alongside me. 

“Scott Jurek is two miles behind you,” she said. 

We were more than twenty-six hours into the race, and Akos had already finished,but the fact that Jurek was just now catching me meant my time must have beenpretty damn good. 

I hadn’t run much, but all those Niland rucks made my hikingstride swift and strong. 

I was able to power hike fifteen-minute miles, and got mynutrition on the move to save time. 

After it was all over, when I examined the splitsand finishing times of all the competitors, I realized my biggest fear, the heat, hadactually helped me. 

It was the great equalizer. 

It made fast runners slow. 

With Jurek on the hunt, I was inspired to give it everything I had as I turned ontoWhitney Portal Road and started the final thirteen-mile climb. 

I flashed onto mypre-race strategy to walk the slopes and run the flats as the road switched back likea snake slithering into the clouds. 

Jurek wasn’t pursuing me, but he was on thechase. 

Akos had finished in twenty-five hours and fifty-eight minutes and Jurekhadn’t been at his best that day. 

The clock was winding down on his effort to repeatas Badwater champion, but he had the tactical advantage of knowing Akos’ time inadvance. 

He also knew his splits. 

Akos hadn’t had that luxury, and somewhere onthe highway he’d stopped for a thirty-minute nap. 

 Jurek wasn’t alone. 

He had a pacer, a formidable runner in his own right namedDusty Olson who nipped at his heels. 

Word was Olson ran at least seventy miles ofthe race himself. 

I heard them approach from behind, and whenever the roadswitched back I could see them below me. 

Finally, at mile 128, on the steepest partof the steepest road in this entire fucked-up race, they were right behind me. 

Istopped running, got out of the way, and cheered them on. 

Jurek was the fastest ultra runner in history at that point, but his pace wasn’t electricthat late in the game. 

It was consistent. 

He chopped down the mighty mountain witheach deliberate step. 

He wore black running shorts, a blue sleeveless shirt, and awhite baseball cap. 

Behind him, Olson had his long, shoulder length hair corralledwith a bandana, otherwise their uniform was identical. 

Jurek was the mule andOlson was riding him. 

“Come on, Jurker! Come on, Jurker! This is your race,” Olson said as they passedme up. 

“No one is better than you! No one!” Olson kept talking as they ran ahead,reminding Jurek that he had more to give. 

Jurek obliged and kept charging up themountain. 

He left it all out on that unforgiving asphalt. 

It was amazing to watch. 

Jurek wound up winning the 2006 edition of Badwater when he finished in twenty-five hours and forty-one minutes, seventeen minutes faster than Akos, who musthave regretted his power nap, but that wasn’t my concern. 

I had a race of my ownto finish. 

Whitney Portal Road winds up a parched, exposed rock escarpment for ten miles,before finding shade in gathering stands of cedar and pine. 

Energized by Jurek andhis crew, I ran most of the last seven miles. 

I used my hips to push my legs forwardand every single step was agony, but after thirty hours, eighteen minutes, and fifty-four seconds of running, hiking, sweating, and suffering, I snapped the tape to thecheers of a small crowd. 

I’d wanted to quit thirty times. 

I had to mentally inch myway through 135 miles, but ninety runners competed that day, and I came in fifthplace. 

    Akos and I after my second Badwater in 2007—I placed third and Akos came in second againI plodded over to a grassy slope in the woods and lay back on a bed of pine needlesas Kate unlaced my shoes. 

That blister had fully colonized my left foot. 

It was sobig it looked like a sixth toe, the color and texture of cherry bubble gum. 

I marveledat it while she removed the compression tape from my feet. 

Then I staggered to thestage to accept my medal from Kostman. 

I’d just finished one of the hardest raceson planet earth. 

I’d visualized that moment ten times at least and thought I’d beelated, but I wasn’t. 

 Blistered toe after Badwater  SBG’s email to Kostman. 

He was right: I did finish in the top 10 percent!He handed me my medal, shook my hand, and interviewed me for the crowd, but Iwas only half there. 

While he spoke, I flashed to the final climb and a pass above8,000 feet, where the view was unreal. 

I could see all the way to Death Valley. 

Nearthe end of another horrible journey, I got to see where I came from. 

It was theperfect metaphor for my twisted life. 

Once again I was broken, destroyed twentydifferent ways, but I’d passed another evolution, another crucible, and my rewardwas a lot more than a medal and a few minutes with Kostman’s microphone. 

It was a whole new bar. 

 I closed my eyes and saw Jurek and Olson, Akos and Karl Meltzer. 

All of them hadsomething I didn’t. 

They understood how to drain every last drop and putthemselves in a position to win the world’s most difficult races, and it was time toseek out that feeling for myself. 

I’d prepared like a madman. 

I knew myself and theterrain. 

I stayed ahead of the quitting mind, answered the simple questions, andstayed in the race, but there was more to be done. 

There was still somewhere higherfor me to rise. 

A cool breeze rustled the trees, dried the sweat from my skin, andsoothed my aching bones. 

It whispered in my ear and shared a secret which echoedin my brain like a drumbeat that wouldn’t stop. 

There is no finish line, Goggins. 

There is no finish line. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com  CHALLENGE #7The main objective here is to slowly start to remove the governor from your brain. 

First, a quick reminder of how this process works. 

In 1999, when I weighed 297pounds, my first run was a quarter mile. 

Fast forward to 2007, I ran 205 miles inthirty-nine hours, nonstop. 

I didn’t get there overnight, and I don’t expect you toeither. 

Your job is to push past your normal stopping point. 

Whether you are running on a treadmill or doing a set of push-ups, get to the pointwhere you are so tired and in pain that your mind is begging you to stop. 

Then pushjust 5 to 10 percent further. 

If the most push-ups you have ever done is one hundredin a workout, do 105 or 110. 

If you normally run thirty miles each week, run 10percent more next week. 

This gradual ramp-up will help prevent injury and allow your body and mind toslowly adapt to your new workload. 

It also resets your baseline, which is importantbecause you’re about to increase your workload another 5 to 10 percent thefollowing week, and the week after that. 

There is so much pain and suffering involved in physical challenges that it’s thebest training to take command of your inner dialogue, and the newfound mentalstrength and confidence you gain by continuing to push yourself physically willcarry over to other aspects in your life. 

You will realize that if you wereunderperforming in your physical challenges, there is a good chance you areunderperforming at school and work too. 

The bottom line is that life is one big mind game. 

The only person you are playingagainst is yourself. 

Stick with this process and soon what you thought wasimpossible will be something you do every fucking day of your life. 

I want to hearyour stories. 

Post on social. 

Hashtags: #canthurtme #The40PercentRule#dontgetcomfortable. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com   CHAPTER EIGHT 8. 

TALENT     NOT REQUIREDThe night before the first long-distance triathlon in my life, I stood with my motheron the deck of a sprawling, seven-million-dollar beach house in Kona watching themoonlight play on the water. 

Most people know Kona, a gorgeous town on the westcoast of the island of Hawaii, and triathlons in general, thanks to the Ironman WorldChampionships. 

Although there are far more Olympic distance and shorter sprinttriathlons held around the world than there are Ironman events, it was the originalIronman in Kona that placed the sport on the international radar. 

It starts with a 2. 

4-mile swim followed by a 112-mile bike ride, and closes with a marathon run. 

Add tothat stiff and shifting winds and blistering heat corridors reflected by harsh lavafields, and the race reduces most competitors to open blisters of raw anguish, but Iwasn’t here for that. 

I came to Kona to compete in a less celebrated form of evenmore intense masochism. 

I was there to compete for the title of Ultraman. 

Over the next three days I would swim 6. 

2 miles, ride 261 miles, and run a doublemarathon, covering the entire perimeter of the Big Island of Hawaii. 

Once again, Iwas raising money for the Special Operations Warrior Foundation, and because I’dbeen written up and interviewed on camera after Badwater, I was invited by a multi-millionaire I’d never met to stay in his absurd palace on the sand in the run-up tothe Ultraman World Championships in November 2006. 

It was a generous gesture, but I was so focused on becoming the very best versionof myself his glitz didn’t impress me. 

In my mind, I still hadn’t achieved shit. 

Ifanything, staying in his house only inflated the chip on my shoulder. 

He wouldnever have invited my wanna-be-thug ass to come chill with him in Kona luxuryback in the day. 

He only reached out because I’d become somebody a rich guy likehim wanted to know. 

Still, I appreciated being able to show my mom a better life,and whenever I was offered a taste, I invited her to experience it with me. 

She’dswallowed more pain than anyone I’d ever known, and I wanted to remind her thatwe’d climbed out of that gutter, while I kept my own gaze locked at sewer level. 

Wedidn’t live in that $7 a month place in Brazil anymore, but I was still paying rent onthat motherfucker, and will be for the rest of my life. 

The race launched from the beach beside the pier in downtown Kona—the samestart line as the Ironman World Championships, but there wasn’t much of a crowdfor our race. 

There were only thirty athletes in the entire field compared to over1,200 in the Ironman! It was such a small group I could look every one of mycompetitors in the eye and size them up, which is how I noticed the hardest man onthe beach. 

I never did catch his name, but I’ll always remember him because he wasin a wheelchair. 

Talk about heart. 

That man had a presence beyond his stature. 

 He was fucking immense!Ever since I’d started up in BUD/S, I’d been in search of people like that. 

Men andwomen with an uncommon way of thinking. 

One thing that surprised me aboutmilitary special operations was that some of the guys lived so mainstream. 

Theyweren’t trying to push themselves every day of their lives, and I wanted to bearound people who thought and trained uncommon 24/7, not just when duty called. 

That man had every excuse in the world to be at home, but he was ready to do oneof the hardest stage races in the world, something 99. 

9 percent of the publicwouldn’t even consider, and with just his two arms! To me, he was what ultra racingwas all about, and its why after Badwater I’d become hooked on this world. 

Talentwasn’t required for this sport. 

It was all about heart and hard work, and it deliveredrelentless challenge after relentless challenge, always demanding more. 

But that doesn’t mean I was well-prepared for this race. 

I still didn’t own a bike. 

Iborrowed one three weeks earlier from another friend. 

It was a Griffin, an uber-high-end bicycle custom made for my friend who was even bigger than I was. 

Iborrowed his clip-in shoes too, which were just shy of clown-sized. 

I filled theempty space with thick socks and compression tape, and didn’t take the time tolearn bike mechanics before leaving for Kona. 

Changing tires, fixing chains andspokes, all the stuff I know how to do now, I hadn’t learned yet. 

I just borrowed thebike and logged over 1,000 miles in the three weeks prior to Ultraman. 

I’d wake upat 4 a. 

m. 

and get one hundred-mile rides in before work. 

On weekends I’d ride 125miles, get off the bike and run a marathon, but I only did six training swims, justtwo in the open water, and in the ultra octagon all your weaknesses are revealed. 

The ten-kilometer swim should have taken me about two and a half hours tocomplete, but it took me over three, and it hurt. 

I was dressed in a sleeveless wetsuitfor buoyancy, but it was too tight under my arms, and within thirty minutes myarmpits began to chafe. 

An hour later the salty edge of my suit had becomesandpaper that ripped my skin with every stroke. 

I switched from freestyle to sidestroke and back again, desperate for comfort that never came. 

Every revolution ofmy arms cut my skin raw and bloody on both sides. 

Coming out of the water at UltramanPlus, the sea was choppy as hell. 

I drank sea water, my stomach flipped and floppedlike a fish suffocating in fresh air, and I puked a half dozen times at least. 

Becauseof the pain, my poor mechanics, and the strong current, I swam a meandering line that stretched to seven and a half miles. 

All of that in order to clear what wassupposed to be a 6. 

2-mile swim. 

My legs were jelly when I staggered to shore, andmy vision rocked like a teeter totter during an earthquake. 

I had to lie down, thencrawl behind the bathrooms, where I vomited again. 

Other swimmers gathered inthe transition area, hopped into their saddles, and pedaled off into the lava fields ina blink. 

We still had a ninety-mile bike ride to knock off before the day was done,and they were getting after it while I was still on my knees. 

Right on time, thosesimple questions bubbled to the surface. 

Why the fuck am I even out here?I’m not a triathlete!I’m chafed to hell, sick as fuck, and the first part of the ride is all uphill!Why do you keep doing this to yourself, Goggins?I sounded like a whiny bitch, but I knew finding some comfort would help me hemmy vagina, so I paid no attention to the other athletes who eased through theirtransition. 

I had to focus on getting my legs under me and slowing my spun-outmind. 

First I got some food down, a little at a time. 

Then I treated the cuts under myarms. 

Most triathletes don’t change their clothes. 

I did. 

I slipped on somecomfortable bike shorts and a lycra shirt, and fifteen minutes later I was upright, inthe saddle, and climbing into the lava fields. 

For the first twenty minutes I was stillnauseous. 

I pedaled and puked, replenished my fluids, and puked again. 

Through itall, I gave myself one job: stay in the fight! Stay in it long enough to find afoothold. 

Ten miles later, as the road rose onto the shoulders of a giant volcano and theincline increased, I shook off my sea legs and found momentum. 

Riders appearedahead like bogeys on a radar, and I picked them off, one by one. 

Victory was a cure-all. 

Each time I passed another motherfucker I got less and less sick. 

I was infourteenth place when I saddled up, but by the time I approached the end of thatninety-mile leg there was only one man in front of me. 

Gary Wang, the favorite inthe race. 

As I hammered toward the finish line I could see a reporter and photographer fromTriathlete magazine interviewing him. 

None of them expected to see my black ass,and they all watched me carefully. 

During the four months since Badwater, I’d oftendreamt of being in position to win an ultra race, and as I coasted past Gary andthose reporters, I knew the moment had arrived, and my expectations wereintergalactic. 

The following morning, we lined up for the second stage, a 171-mile bike ridethrough the mountains and back toward the west coast. 

Gary Wang had a buddy inthe race, Jeff Landauer, aka the Land Shark, and those two rode together. 

Gary haddone the race before and knew the terrain. 

I didn’t, and by mile one hundred, I wasroughly six minutes off the lead. 

As usual, my mother and Kate were my two-headed support crew. 

They handed mereplacement water bottles, packets of GU, and protein drinks from the side of theroad, which I consumed in motion to keep my glycogen and electrolyte levels up. 

 I’d become much more scientific about my nutrition since that Myoplex and Ritzcracker meltdown in San Diego, and with the biggest climb of the day looming intoview I needed to be ready to roar. 

On a bicycle, mountains produce pain, and painwas my business. 

As the road peaked in pitch, I put my head down and hammeredas hard as I could. 

My lungs heaved until they were flipped inside out and backagain. 

My heart was a pounding bass line. 

When I crested the pass, my mom pulledup alongside me and hollered, “David, you are two minutes off the lead!”Roger that!I curled into an aerodynamic crouch and shot downhill at over 40 mph. 

Myborrowed Griffin was equipped with aero bars and I leaned over them, focusingonly on the white dotted line and my perfect form. 

When the road leveled off I wentall out and kept my pace up around 27 mph. 

I had a Land Shark and his buddy onan industrial-sized hook, and was reeling them all the way in. 

Until my front tire blew. 

Before I had time to react, I was off the bike, somersaulting over the handlebars intospace. 

I could see it happening in slow motion, but time sped back up when I crashlanded on my right side and my shoulder crumpled with blunt force. 

The side of myface skidded the asphalt until I stopped moving, and I rolled onto my back in shock. 

My mother slammed on her brakes, leapt from the car, and rushed over. 

I wasbleeding in five places, but nothing felt broken. 

Except my helmet, which wascracked in two, my sunglasses, which were shattered, and my bicycle. 

I’d run over a bolt that pierced the tire, tube, and rim. 

I didn’t pay attention to myroad rash, the pain in my shoulder, or the blood dribbling down my elbow andcheek. 

All I thought about was that bicycle. 

Once again, I was underprepared! I hadno spare parts and didn’t have any clue how to change a tube or a tire. 

I had rented aback-up bicycle which was in my mom’s rental car, but it was a heavy, slow pieceof shit compared to that Griffin. 

It didn’t even have clip in pedals, so I called for theofficial race mechanics to assess the Griffin. 

As we waited, seconds piled up intotwenty precious minutes and when mechanics arrived, they didn’t have supplies tofix my front wheel either, so I hopped on my clunky back-up and kept rolling. 

I tried not to think of bad luck and missed opportunities. 

I needed to finish strongand get myself within striking distance by the end of the day, because day threewould bring a double marathon, and I was convinced that I was the best runner inthe field. 

Sixteen miles from the finish line, the bike mechanic tracked me down. 

He’d repaired my Griffin! I switched out my hardware for the second time andmade up eight minutes on the leaders, finishing the day in third place, twenty-twominutes off the lead. 

I crafted a simple strategy for day three. 

Go out hard and build up a fat cushion overGary and the Land Shark so that when I hit the inevitable wall, I’d have enoughdistance to maintain the overall lead all the way to the finish line. 

In other words, Ididn’t have any strategy at all. 

I began my run at Boston Marathon qualifying pace. 

I pushed hard because Iwanted my competitors to hear my splits and forfeit their souls as I built that biglead I’d anticipated. 

I knew I would blow up somewhere. 

That’s ultra life. 

I just hoped it would happen late enough in the race that Gary and the Land Shark wouldbe content to race one another for second and give up all hope of winning theoverall title. 

Didn’t happen quite like that. 

At mile thirty-five I was already in agony and walking more than I was running. 

Bymile forty, I watched both enemy vehicles pull up so their crew chiefs could peepmy form. 

I was showing a ton of weakness, which gave Gary and the Land Sharkammunition. 

The miles mounted too slowly. 

I hemorrhaged time. 

Luckily, by mileforty-five, Gary had blown up too, but the Land Shark was rock solid, still on myass, and I didn’t have anything left to fight him off. 

Instead, as I suffered andstaggered toward downtown Kona, my lead evaporated. 

In the end, the Land Shark taught me a vital lesson. 

From day one, he had run hisown race. 

My early burst on day three didn’t faze him. 

He welcomed it as the ill-conceived strategy that it was, focused on his own pace, waited me out, and took mysoul. 

I was the first athlete to cross the finish line of the Ultraman that year, but asfar as the clock was concerned I was no champion. 

While I came in first place onthe run, I lost the overall race by ten minutes and took second place. 

The LandShark was crowned Ultraman!I watched him celebrate knowing exactly how I’d wasted an opportunity to win. 

I’dlost my vantage point. 

I’d never evaluated the race strategically and didn’t have anybackstops in place. 

Backstops are a versatile tool that I employ in all facets of mylife. 

I was lead navigator when I operated in Iraq with the SEAL Teams, and“backstop” is a navigation term. 

It’s the mark I made on my map. 

An alert that we’dmissed a turn or veered off course. 

Let’s say you’re navigating through the woods and you have to go one click towarda ridgeline, then make a turn. 

In the military, we would do a map study ahead oftime and mark that turn on our maps, and another point about 200 meters past thatturn, and a third an additional 150 meters past the second mark. 

Those last twomarks are your backstops. 

Typically, I used terrain features, like roads, creeks, agiant cliff in the countryside, or landmark buildings in an urban setting, so thatwhen we hit them I knew we’d gone off course. 

That’s what backstops are for, totell you to turn around, reassess, and take an alternative route to accomplish thesame mission. 

I never left our base in Iraq without having three exit strategies. 

Aprimary route and two others, pinned to backstops, we could fall back to if our mainroute became compromised. 

On day three of Ultraman, I tried to win with sheer will. 

I was all motor, nointellect. 

I didn’t evaluate my condition, respect my opponents’ heart, or manage theclock well enough. 

I had no primary strategy, let alone alternative avenues tovictory, and therefore I had no idea where to employ backstops. 

In retrospect Ishould have paid more attention to my own clock, and my backstops should havebeen placed on my split times. 

When I saw how fast I was running that firstmarathon, I should have been alarmed and eased off the gas. 

A slower firstmarathon may have left me with enough energy to drop the hammer once we wereback in the lava fields on the Ironman course, heading toward the finish line. 

That’swhen you take someone’s soul—at the end of a race, not at the beginning. 

I’d racedhard, but if I’d run smarter and handled the bike situation better, I would have given myself a better chance to win. 

Still, coming in second place at Ultraman was no disaster. 

I raised good money forfamilies in need and booked more positive ink for the SEALs in Triathlete andCompetitor magazines. 

Navy brass took notice. 

One morning, I was called into ameeting with Admiral Ed Winters, a two-star Admiral and the top man at NavalSpecial Warfare Command. 

When you’re an enlisted guy and hear an Admiralwants a word, your ass sort of puckers up. 

He wasn’t supposed to seek me out. 

There was a chain of command in place specifically to prevent conversationsbetween Rear Admirals and enlisted men like me. 

Without any warning that was allout the window, and I had a feeling it was my own fault. 

Thanks to the positive media I’d generated, I had received orders to join therecruitment division in 2007, and by the time I was ordered into the Admiral’soffice I’d done plenty of public speaking on behalf of the Navy SEALs. 

But I wasdifferent than most of the other recruiters. 

I didn’t just parrot the Navy’s script. 

Ialways included my own life story, off the cuff. 

As I waited outside the Admiral’soffice I closed my eyes and flipped through memory files, searching for when andhow I’d overstepped and embarrassed the SEALs. 

I was the picture of tension,sitting stiff and alert, sweating through my uniform when he opened the door to hisoffice. 

“Goggins,” he said, “good to see you, come on in. 

” I opened my eyes, followed himinside, and stood straight as an arrow, locked at attention. 

“Sit down,” he said with asmile, gesturing to a chair facing his desk. 

I sat, but maintained my posture andavoided all eye contact. 

Admiral Winters sized me up. 

He was in his late fifties, and though he appeared relaxed, he maintained perfectposture. 

To become an Admiral is to rise through the ranks of tens of thousands. 

He’d been a SEAL since 1981, was an Operations Officer at DEVGRU (NavalSpecial Warfare Development Group), and a Commander in Afghanistan and Iraq. 

At each stop he stood taller than the rest, and was among the strongest, smartest,shrewdest, and most charismatic men the Navy had ever seen. 

He also fit a certainstandard. 

Admiral Winters was the ultimate insider, and I was as outside the box asyou could get in the United States Navy. 

“Hey, relax,” he said, “you aren’t in any trouble. 

You’re doing a great job inrecruiting. 

” He gestured to a file on his otherwise immaculate desk. 

It was filledwith some of my clips. 

“You’re representing us really well. 

But there’s some menout there we need to do a better job of reaching out to, and I’m hoping you canhelp. 

”That’s when it finally hit me. 

A two-star Admiral needed my help. 

The trouble we faced as an organization, he said, was that we were terrible atrecruiting African Americans into the SEAL Teams. 

I knew that already. 

Blackpeople made up only 1 percent of all special forces, even though we are 13 percentof the general population. 

I was just the thirty-sixth African American ever tograduate BUD/S, and one of the reasons for that was we weren’t hitting the bestplaces to recruit black men into the SEAL teams, and we didn’t have the rightrecruiters either. 

The military likes to think of itself as a pure meritocracy (it isn’t),which is why for decades this issue was ignored. 

I called Admiral Winters recently, and he had this to say about the problem, which was originally flagged by thePentagon during the second Bush administration and sent to the Admiral’s desk to fix. 

“We were missing an opportunity to get great athletes into the teams and make the teams better,” he said, “and we had places we needed to send people where, if they looked like me, they would be compromised. 

”In Iraq, Admiral Winters made his name building elite counter terrorism forces. 

That’s one of the primary missions in special forces: to train allied military units sothey can control social cancers like terrorism and drug trafficking and maintain stability within borders. 

By 2007, Al Qaeda had made inroads into Africa, alliedwith existing extremist networks including Boko Haram and al Shabaab, and therewas talk of building up counterterrorism forces in Somalia, Chad, Nigeria, Mali,Cameroon, Burkina Faso, and Niger. 

Our operations in Niger made internationalnews in 2018 when four American special operations soldiers were killed in anambush, drawing public scrutiny to the mission. 

But back in 2007, almost nobodyknew we were about to get involved in West Africa, or that we lacked the personnelto get it done. 

As I sat in his office, what I heard was the time had finally comewhen we needed black people in special forces and our military leaders wereclueless as to how to meet that need and entice more of us into the fold. 

It was all new information to me. 

I didn’t know anything about the African threat. 

The only hostile terrain I knew about was in Afghanistan and Iraq. 

That is, untilAdmiral Winters dropped a whole new detail on me, and the military’s problemofficially became my problem. 

I’d report to my Captain and the Admiral, he said,and hit the road, visiting ten to twelve cities at a time, with a goal of spikingrecruiting numbers in the POC (people of color) category. 

We made the first stop on this new mission together. 

It was at Howard University, inWashington D. 

C. 

, probably the best known historically black university in America. 

We’d dropped in to speak to the football team, and though I knew almost nothingabout historically black colleges and universities, I knew students who attendedthem aren’t usually the type to think of the military as an optimal career choice. 

Thanks to our country’s history and the rampant racism that continues to this day,black political thought trends left of center at these institutions, and if you’rerecruiting for the Navy SEALs, there are definitely better choices than the HowardUniversity practice field to find a willing ear. 

But this new focus required work inhostile territory, not mass enthusiasm. 

We were looking for one or two great men ateach stop. 

The Admiral and I walked onto the field, dressed in uniform, and I noted suspicionand disregard in the eyes of our audience. 

Admiral Winters had planned to introduceme, but our icy reception told me we had to go another way. 

“You were shy at first,” Admiral Winters remembered, “but when it was time tospeak, you looked at me and said, ‘I got this, sir. 

’”I launched right into my life story. 

I told those athletes what I’ve already told you,and said we were looking for guys with heart. 

Men who knew it was going to behard tomorrow and the day after that and welcomed every challenge. 

Men whowanted to become better athletes, and smarter and more capable in all aspects of their life. 

We wanted guys who craved honor and purpose and were open mindedenough to face their deepest fears. 

“By the time you were done you could have heard a pin drop,” Admiral Wintersrecalled. 

From then on, I was given command of my own schedule and budget and leeway tooperate, as long as I hit certain recruitment thresholds. 

I had to come up with myown material and knew that most people didn’t think they could ever become aNavy SEAL, so I broadened the message. 

I wanted everyone who heard me out toknow that even if they didn’t walk in our direction they could still become morethan they ever dreamed. 

I made sure to cover my life in its entirety so if anyone hadany excuse, my story would void all that out. 

My main drive was to deliver hopethat with or without the military anybody could change their life, so long as theykept an open mind, abandoned the path of least resistance, and sought out thedifficult and most challenging tasks they could find. 

I was mining for diamonds inthe rough like me. 

From 2007–2009, I was on the road for 250 days a year and spoke to 500,000people at high schools and universities. 

I spoke at inner city high schools in toughneighborhoods, at dozens of historically black colleges and universities, and atschools with all cultures, shapes, and shades well represented. 

I’d come a long wayfrom fourth grade, when I couldn’t stand up in front of a class of twenty kids andsay my own name without stuttering. 

Teenagers are walking, talking bullshit detectors, but the kids who heard me speakbought into my message because everywhere I stopped, I also ran an ultra race androlled my training runs and races into my overall recruitment strategy. 

I’d usuallyland in their town midweek, make my speeches, then run a race on Saturday andSunday. 

In one stretch in 2007, I ran an ultra almost every weekend. 

There werefifty-mile races, 100-kilometer races, 100-mile races, and longer ones too. 

I was allabout spreading the Navy SEAL legend that I loved, and wanted to be true andliving our ethos. 

Essentially, I had two full-time jobs. 

My schedule was jammed full, and while Iknow that having the flexibility to manage my own time contributed to my ability totrain for and compete on the ultra circuit, I still put in fifty hours a week at work,clocking in every day from about 7:30 a. 

m. 

to 5:30 p. 

m. 

My training hours came inaddition to, not instead of, my work commitments. 

I appeared at upwards of forty-five schools every month, and after each appearanceI had to file an After Action Report (AAR), detailing how many separate events (anauditorium speech, a workout, etc. 

) I organized, how many kids I spoke to, and howmany of those were actually interested. 

These AARs went directly to my Captainand the Admiral. 

I learned quickly that I was my own best prop. 

Sometimes I’d dress in a SEAL t-shirt with a Trident on it, run fifty miles to a speaking engagement, and show upsoaking wet. 

Or I would do push-ups for the first five minutes of my speech, or rolla pull-up bar out on stage and do pull-ups while I was talking. 

That’s right, the shityou see me do on social media isn’t new. 

I’ve been living this life for eleven years! Wherever I stopped, I invited the kids who were interested to come train with mebefore or after school, or crew on one of my ultra races. 

Word got out and soon themedia—local television, print, and radio—showed up, especially if I was runningbetween cities to get to the next gig. 

I had to be articulate, well groomed, and dowell in the races I entered. 

I remember landing in Colorado the week of the legendary Leadville 100 trail race. 

The school year had just started, and on my first night in Denver I mapped out thefive schools on my roster in relation to the trails I wanted to hike and run. 

At eachstop I’d invite the kids to train with me, but warn them that my day started early. 

At3 a. 

m. 

I would drive to a trailhead, meet up with all the students who dared to show,and by 4 a. 

m. 

we’d begin power hiking up one of Colorado’s fifty-eight summitsabove 14,000-feet. 

Then we’d sprint down the mountain to strengthen our quads. 

At9 a. 

m. 

I hit another school, and then another. 

After the bell rang, I worked out withthe football, track, or swim teams at the schools I visited, then ran back into themountains to train until sunset. 

All of that to recruit stud athletes and acclimatize forthe highest altitude ultra marathon in the world. 

The race started at 4 a. 

m. 

on a Saturday, departing from the city of Leadville, aworking-class ski town with frontier roots, and traversing a network of beautifuland harsh Rocky Mountain trails that range from 9,200 feet to 12,600 feet inelevation. 

When I finished at 2 a. 

m. 

on Sunday, a teenager from Denver whoattended a school I’d visited a few days earlier was waiting for me at the finish line. 

I didn’t have a great race (I came in 14th place, rather than my typical top five), butI always made sure to finish strong, and when I sprinted home he approached mewith a wide smile and said, “I drove two hours just to see you finish!”The lesson: you never know who you’re affecting. 

My poor race results meant lessthan nothing to that young man because I’d helped open his eyes to a new world ofpossibility and capability that he sensed within himself. 

He’d followed me from hishigh school auditorium to Leadville because he was looking for absolute proof—myfinishing the race—that it was possible to transcend the typical and become more,and as I cooled down and toweled off he asked me for tips so he could one day runall day and night through the mountains in his backyard. 

I have several stories like that. 

More than a dozen kids came out to pace and crewfor me at the McNaughton Park Trail Race, a 150-miler held outside of Peoria,Illinois. 

Two dozen students trained with me in Minot, North Dakota. 

Together weran the frozen tundra before sunrise in January when it was twenty below zero!Once I spoke at a school in a majority black neighborhood in Atlanta, and as I wasleaving, a mother showed up with her two sons who had long dreamed of becomingNavy SEALs but kept it a secret because enlisting in the military wasn’t consideredcool in their neighborhood. 

When summer vacation broke out, I flew them to SanDiego to live and train with me. 

I woke their asses up at 4 a. 

m. 

and beat them downon the beach like they were in a junior version of First Phase. 

They did not enjoythemselves, but they learned the truth about what it takes to live the ethos. 

Wherever I went, whether the students were interested in a military career or not,they always asked if they had the same hardware I had. 

Could they run a hundredmiles in one day? What would it take to reach their full potential? This is what I’dtell them: Our culture has become hooked on the quick-fix, the life hack, efficiency. 

Everyoneis on the hunt for that simple action algorithm that nets maximum profit with theleast amount of effort. 

There’s no denying this attitude may get you some of thetrappings of success, if you’re lucky, but it will not lead to a calloused mind or self-mastery. 

If you want to master the mind and remove your governor, you’ll have tobecome addicted to hard work. 

Because passion and obsession, even talent, are onlyuseful tools if you have the work ethic to back them up. 

My work ethic is the single most important factor in all of my accomplishments. 

Everything else is secondary, and when it comes to hard work, whether in the gymor on the job, The 40% Rule applies. 

To me, a forty-hour work week is a 40 percenteffort. 

It may be satisfactory, but that’s another word for mediocrity. 

Don’t settle fora forty-hour work week. 

There are 168 hours in a week! That means you have thehours to put in that extra time at work without skimping on your exercise. 

It meansstreamlining your nutrition, spending quality time with your wife and kids. 

It meansscheduling your life like you’re on a twenty-four-hour mission every single day. 

The number one excuse I hear from people as to why they don’t work out as muchas they want to is that they don’t have time. 

Look, we all have work obligations,none of us want to lose sleep, and you’ll need time with the family or they’ll trip thefuck out. 

I get it, and if that’s your situation, you must win the morning. 

When I was full-time with the SEALs I maximized the dark hours before dawn. 

When my wife was sleeping, I would bang out a six- to ten-mile run. 

My gear wasall laid out the night before, my lunch was packed, and my work clothes were in mylocker at work where I’d shower before my day started at 7:30 a. 

m. 

On a typicalday, I’d be out the door for my run just after 4 a. 

m. 

and back by 5:15 a. 

m. 

Since thatwasn’t enough for me, and because we only owned one car, I rode my bike (I finallygot my own shit!) twenty-five miles to work. 

I’d work from 7:30 a. 

m. 

to noon, andeat at my desk before or after my lunch break. 

During the lunch hour I’d hit thegym or do a four- to six-mile beach run, work the afternoon shift and hop on mybike for the twenty-five-mile ride home. 

By the time I was home at 7 p. 

m. 

, I’d haverun about fifteen miles, rocked fifty miles on the bike, and put in a full day at theoffice. 

I was always home for dinner and in bed by 10 p. 

m. 

so I could do it all overagain the next day. 

On Saturdays I’d sleep in until 7 a. 

m. 

, hit a three-hour workout,and spend the rest of the weekend with Kate. 

If I didn’t have a race, Sundays weremy active recovery days. 

I’d do an easy ride at a low heart rate, keeping my pulsebelow 110 beats per minute to stimulate healthy blood flow. 

Maybe you think I’m a special case or an obsessive maniac. 

Fine, I won’t arguewith you. 

But what about my friend Mike? He’s a big-time financial advisor in NewYork City. 

His job is high pressure and his work day is a hell of a lot longer thaneight hours. 

He has a wife and two kids, and he’s an ultra runner. 

Here’s how hedoes it. 

He wakes up at 4 a. 

m. 

every weekday, runs sixty to ninety minutes eachmorning while his family is still snoozing, rides a bike to work and back and does aquick thirty-minute treadmill run after he gets home. 

He goes out for longer runs onweekends, but he minimizes its impact on his family obligations. 

He’s high-powered, wealthy as fuck, and could easily maintain his status quo withless effort and enjoy the sweet fruits of his labors, but he finds a way to stay hardbecause his labors are his sweetest fruits. 

And he makes time to get it all in byminimizing the amount of bullshit clogging his schedule. 

His priorities are clear, and he remains dedicated to his priorities. 

I’m not talking about general prioritieshere either. 

Each hour of his week is dedicated to a particular task and when thathour shows up in real time, he focuses 100 percent on that task. 

That’s how I do ittoo, because that is the only way to minimize wasted hours. 

Evaluate your life in its totality! We all waste so much time doing meaninglessbullshit. 

We burn hours on social media and watching television, which by the endof the year would add up to entire days and weeks if you tabulated time like you doyour taxes. 

You should, because if you knew the truth you’d deactivate yourFacebook account STAT, and cut your cable. 

When you find yourself havingfrivolous conversations or becoming ensnared in activities that don’t better you inany way, move the fuck on!For years I’ve lived like a monk. 

I don’t see or spend time with a lot of people. 

Mycircle is very tight. 

I post on social media once or twice a week and I never checkanybody else’s feeds because I don’t follow anyone. 

That’s just me. 

I’m not sayingyou need to be that unforgiving, because you and I probably don’t share the samegoals. 

But I know you have goals too, and room for improvement, or you wouldn’tbe reading my book, and I guarantee that if you audited your schedule you’d findtime for more work and less bullshit. 

It’s up to you to find ways to eviscerate your bullshit. 

How much time do you spendat the dinner table talking about nothing after the meal is done? How many calls andtexts do you send for no reason at all? Look at your whole life, list your obligationsand tasks. 

Put a time stamp on them. 

How many hours are required to shop, eat, andclean? How much sleep do you need? What’s your commute like? Can you make itthere under your own power? Block everything into windows of time, and onceyour day is scheduled out, you’ll know how much flexibility you have to exerciseon a given day and how to maximize it. 

Perhaps you aren’t looking to get fit, but have been dreaming of starting a businessof your own, or have always wanted to learn a language or an instrument you’reobsessed with. 

Fine, the same rule applies. 

Analyze your schedule, kill your emptyhabits, burn out the bullshit, and see what’s left. 

Is it one hour per day? Three? Nowmaximize that shit. 

That means listing your prioritized tasks every hour of the day. 

You can even narrow it down to fifteen-minute windows, and don’t forget to includebackstops in your day-to-day schedule. 

Remember how I forgot to includebackstops in my race plan at Ultraman? You need backstops in your day-to-dayschedule too. 

If one task bleeds into overtime, make sure you know it, and begin totransition into your next prioritized task straight away. 

Use your smartphone forproductivity hacks, not click bait. 

Turn on your calendar alerts. 

Have those alarmsset. 

If you audit your life, skip the bullshit, and use backstops, you’ll find time to doeverything you need and want to do. 

But remember that you also need rest, soschedule that in. 

Listen to your body, sneak in those ten- to twenty-minute powernaps when necessary, and take one full rest day per week. 

If it’s a rest day, trulyallow your mind and body to relax. 

Turn your phone off. 

Keep the computer shutdown. 

A rest day means you should be relaxed, hanging with friends or family, andeating and drinking well, so you can recharge and get back at it. 

It’s not a day tolose yourself in technology or stay hunched at your desk in the form of a damnquestion mark. 

 The whole point of the twenty-four-hour mission is to keep up a championshippace, not for a season or a year, but for your entire life! That requires quality restand recovery time. 

Because there is no finish line. 

There is always more to learn,and you will always have weaknesses to strengthen if you want to become as hardas woodpecker lips. 

Hard enough to hammer countless miles, and finish that shitstrong! ***In 2008, I was back in Kona for the Ironman World Championships. 

I was in peakvisibility mode for the Navy SEALs, and Commander Keith Davids, one of the bestathletes I ever saw in the SEAL teams, and I were slated to do the race. 

The NBCSports broadcast tracked our every move and turned our race within the race into afeature the announcers could cut to between clocking the main contenders. 

Our entrance was straight out of a Hollywood pitch meeting. 

While most athleteswere deep into their pre-race rituals and getting psyched up for the longest day oftheir racing lives, we buzzed overhead in a C-130, jumped from 1,500 feet, andparachuted into the water, where we were scooped up by a Zodiac and motored toshore just four minutes before the gun. 

That was barely enough time for a blast ofenergy gel, a swig of water, and to change into our Navy SEAL triathlon suits. 

You know by now that I’m slow in the water, and Davids destroyed my ass on the2. 

4-mile swim. 

I’m just as strong as he is on a bicycle, but my lower back tightenedup that day and at the halfway point I had to stop and stretch out. 

By the time Icoasted into the transition area after a 112-mile bike ride, Davids had thirty minuteson me, and early on in the marathon, I didn’t do a great job of getting any of it back. 

My body was rebelling and I had to walk those early miles, but I stayed in the fight,and at mile ten found a rhythm and started clipping time. 

Somewhere ahead of meDavids blew up, and I inched closer. 

For a few miles I could see him plodding in thedistance, suffering in those lava fields, heat shimmering off the asphalt in sheets. 

Iknew he wanted to beat me because he was a proud man. 

He was an Officer, a greatoperator, and a stud athlete. 

I wanted to beat him too. 

That’s how Navy SEALs arewired, and I could have blown by him, but as I got closer I told myself to humbleup. 

I caught him with just over two miles to go. 

He looked at me with a mix ofrespect and hilarious exasperation. 

“Fucking Goggins,” he said with a smile. 

We’d jumped into the water together,started the race together, and we were gonna finish this thing together. 

We ran sideby side for the final two miles, crossed the finish line, and hugged it out. 

It wasterrific fucking television. 

       At the Kona Ironman finish line with Keith Davids ***Everything was going well in my life. 

My career was spit-shined and gleaming, I’dmade a name for myself in the sports world, and I had plans to get back onto thebattlefield like a Navy SEAL should. 

But sometimes, even when you are doingeverything right in life, shit storms appear and multiply. 

Chaos can and will descendwithout warning, and when (not if) that happens, there won’t be anything you cando to stop it. 

If you’re fortunate, the issues or injuries are relatively minor, and when thoseincidents crop up it’s on you to adjust and stay after it. 

If you get injured or othercomplications arise that prevent you from working on your primary passion, refocusyour energy elsewhere. 

The activities we pursue tend to be our strengths because itsfun to do what we’re great at. 

Very few people enjoy working on their weaknesses,so if you’re a terrific runner with a knee injury that will prevent you from runningfor twelve weeks, that is a great time to get into yoga, increasing your flexibilityand your overall strength, which will make you a better and less injury-proneathlete. 

If you’re a guitar player with a broken hand, sit down at the keys and useyour one good hand to become a more versatile musician. 

The point is not to allowa setback to shatter our focus, or our detours to dictate our mindset. 

Always beready to adjust, recalibrate, and stay after it to become better, somehow. 

The sole reason I work out like I do isn’t to prepare for and win ultra races. 

I don’thave an athletic motive at all. 

It’s to prepare my mind for life itself. 

Life will alwaysbe the most grueling endurance sport, and when you train hard, get uncomfortable,and callous your mind, you will become a more versatile competitor, trained to finda way forward no matter what. 

Because there will be times when the shit life throwsat you isn’t minor at all. 

Sometimes life hits you dead in the fucking heart. 

My two-year stint on recruitment detail was due to end in 2009, and while I enjoyedmy time inspiring the next gen, I was looking forward to getting back out andoperating in the field. 

But before I left my post I planned one more big splash. 

Iwould ride a bicycle from the beach in San Diego to Annapolis, Maryland, in alegendary endurance road race, the Race Across America. 

The race was in June, sofrom January to May I spent all my free time on the bike. 

I woke up at 4 a. 

m. 

androde 110 miles before work, then rode twenty to thirty miles home at the end of along work day. 

On weekends I put in at least one 200-mile day, and averaged over700 miles per week. 

The race would take about two weeks to complete, there wouldbe very little sleep involved, and I wanted to be ready for the greatest athleticchallenge of my entire life. 

      My RAAM training logThen in early May everything capsized. 

Like a malfunctioning appliance, my heartwent on the blink, almost overnight. 

For years my resting pulse rate was in thethirties. 

Suddenly it was in the seventies and eighties and any activity would spike ituntil I verged on collapse. 

It was as if I’d sprung a leak, and all my energy had beensucked from my body. 

A simple five-minute bike ride would send my heart racingto 150 beats per minute. 

It pounded uncontrollably during a short walk up a singleflight of stairs. 

At first I thought it was from overtraining and when I went to the doctor, he agreed,but scheduled an echocardiogram for me at Balboa Hospital just in case. 

When Iwent in for the test, the tech gelled up his all-knowing receiver and rolled it over mychest to get the angles he’d need while I lay on my left side, my head away from hismonitor. 

He was a talker and kept bullshitting about a whole lot of nothing while hechecked out all my chambers and valves. 

Everything looked solid, he said, untilsuddenly, forty-five minutes into the procedure, this chatty motherfucker stoppedtalking. 

Instead of his voice, I heard a lot of clicking and zooming. 

Then he left theroom and reappeared with another tech a few minutes later. 

They clicked, zoomed,and whispered, but didn’t let me in on their big secret. 

When people in white coats are treating your heart as a puzzle to be solved right infront of you, it’s hard not to think that you’re probably pretty fucked up. 

Part of mewanted answers immediately, because I was scared as shit, but I didn’t want to be abitch and show my cards, so I opted to stay calm and let the professionals work. 

Within a few minutes two other men walked into the room. 

One of them was acardiologist. 

He took over the wand, rolled it on my chest, and peered into themonitor with one short nod. 

Then he patted me on the shoulder like I was hisfucking intern, and said, “Okay, let’s talk. 

”“You have an Atrial Septal Defect,” he said as we stood in the hallway, his techsand nurses pacing back and forth, disappearing into and reappearing from rooms oneither side of us. 

I stared straight ahead and said nothing until he realized I had noidea what the fuck he was talking about. 

“You have a hole in your heart. 

” Hescrunched his forehead and stroked his chin. 

“A pretty good-sized one too. 

”“Holes don’t just open in your heart, do they?”“No, no,” he said with a laugh, “you were born with it. 

”He went on to explain that the hole was in the wall between my right and left atria,which was a problem because when you have a hole between the chambers in yourheart, oxygenated blood mixes with the non-oxygenated blood. 

Oxygen is anessential element that every single one of our cells needs to survive. 

According tothe doctor, I was only supplying about half of the necessary oxygen my muscles andorgans needed for optimal performance. 

That leads to swelling in the feet and abdomen, heart palpitations, and occasionalbouts of shortness of breath. 

It certainly explained the fatigue I’d been feelingrecently. 

It also impacts the lungs, he said, because it floods the pulmonary bloodvessels with more blood than they can handle, which makes it much more difficultto recover from overexertion and illness. 

I flashed back to all the issues I hadrecovering after contracting double pneumonia during my first Hell Week. 

The fluid I had in my lungs never fully receded. 

During subsequent Hell Weeks, and aftergetting into ultras, I found myself hocking up phlegm during and after finishingraces. 

Some nights, there was so much fluid in me I couldn’t sleep. 

I’d just sit upand spit phlegm into empty Gatorade bottles, wondering when that boring ritualwould play itself out. 

Most people, when they become ultra obsessed, may dealwith overuse injuries, but their cardiovascular system is finely tuned. 

Even though Iwas able to compete and accomplish so much with my broken body, I never felt thatgreat. 

I’d learned to endure and overcome, and as the doctor continued to downloadthe essentials I realized that for the first time in my entire life, I’d also been prettyfucking lucky. 

You know, the backhanded brand of luck where you have a hole inyour heart, but are thanking God that it hasn’t killed you…yet. 

Because when you have an ASD like mine and you dive deep under water, gasbubbles, which are supposed to travel through the pulmonary blood vessels to befiltered through the lungs, might leak from that hole upon ascent, and recirculate asweaponized embolisms that can clog blood vessels in the brain and lead to a stroke,or block an artery to the heart, and cause cardiac arrest. 

It’s like diving with a dirtybomb floating inside you, never knowing when or where it might go off. 

I wasn’t alone in this fight. 

One out of every ten children are born with this samedefect, but in most cases the hole closes on its own, and surgery isn’t required. 

Injust under 2,000 American children each year, surgery is required, but is usuallyadministered before a patient starts school, because there are better screeningprocesses these days. 

Most people my age who were born with ASD left thehospital in their mothers’ arms and lived with a potential deadly problem without aclue. 

Until, like me, their heart started giving them trouble in their thirties. 

If I hadignored my warning signs, I could have dropped dead during a four-mile run. 

That’s why if you’re in the military and are diagnosed with an ASD, you can’t jumpout of airplanes or scuba dive, and if anyone had known of my condition there is noway the Navy ever would have let me become a SEAL. 

It’s astonishing I even madeit through Hell Week, Badwater, or any of those other races. 

“I’m truly amazed you could do all you’ve done with this condition,” the doctorsaid. 

I nodded. 

He thought I was a medical marvel, some kind of outlier, or simply agifted athlete blessed with amazing luck. 

To me, it was just further evidence that Ididn’t owe my accomplishments to God-given talent or great genetics. 

I had afucking hole in my heart! I was running on a tank perpetually half full, and thatmeant my life was absolute proof of what’s possible when someone dedicatesthemselves to harnessing the full power of the human mind. 

Three days later I was in surgery. 

And boy did the doctor fuck that one up. 

First off, the anesthesia didn’t take all theway, which meant I was half awake as the surgeon sliced into my inner thigh,inserted a catheter into my femoral artery, and once it reached my heart, deployed ahelix patch through that catheter and moved it into place, supposedly patching thehole in my heart. 

Meanwhile, they had a camera down my throat, which I could feelas I gagged and struggled to endure the two-hour-long procedure. 

After all of that,my troubles were supposed to have been over. 

The doctor mentioned that it would take time for my heart tissue to grow around and seal the patch, but after a week hecleared me for light exercise. 

Roger that, I thought, as I dropped to the floor to do a set of push-ups as soon as Igot home. 

Almost immediately my heart went into atrial fibrillation, also known asa-fib. 

My pulse spiked from 120 to 230, back to 120 then up to 250. 

I felt dizzy andhad to sit down as I stared at my heart rate monitor, while my breathing normalized. 

Once again my resting heart rate was in the eighties. 

In other words, nothing hadchanged. 

I called the cardiologist who tagged it a minor side effect and beggedpatience. 

I took him at his word and rested for a few more days then hopped on thebike for an easy ride home from work. 

At first all went well but after about fifteenmiles, my heart went into a-fib once again. 

My pulse rate bounced from 120 to 230and back again across the imaginary graph in my mind’s eye with no rhythmwhatsoever. 

Kate drove me straight to Balboa Hospital. 

After that visit, and secondand third opinions, it was clear that the patch had either failed or was insufficient tocover the entire hole, and that I’d need a second heart surgery. 

The Navy didn’t want any part of that. 

They feared further complications andsuggested I scale back my lifestyle, accept my new normal, and a retirementpackage. 

Yeah, right. 

Instead, I found a better doctor at Balboa who said we’d haveto wait several months before we could even contemplate another heart surgery. 

Inthe meantime, I couldn’t jump or dive, and obviously couldn’t operate in the field,so I stayed in recruitment. 

It was a different life, no doubt, and I was tempted to feelsorry for myself. 

After all, this thing that hit me out of the clear blue changed theentire landscape of my military career, but I’d been training for life, not ultra races,and I refused to hang my head. 

I knew that if I maintained a victim’s mentality I wouldn’t get anything at all out ofa fucked-up situation, and I didn’t want to sit home defeated all day long. 

So I usedthe time to perfect my recruitment presentation. 

I wrote up sterling AARs andbecame much more detail oriented in my administrative work. 

Does that soundboring to you? Fuck yes, it was boring! But it was honest, necessary work, and Iused it to keep my mind sharp for when the moment came that I’d be able to dropback into the fight for real. 

Or so I hoped. 

A full fourteen months after the first surgery, I was once again rolling through ahospital corridor on my back, staring at the fluorescent lights in the ceiling, headedto pre-op, with no guarantees. 

While the techs and nurses shaved me down andprepped me up, I thought about all I’d accomplished in the military and wondered,was it enough? If the docs couldn’t fix me this time would I be willing to retire,satisfied? That question lingered in my head until the anesthesiologist placed anoxygen mask over my face and counted down softly in my ear. 

Just before lightsout, I heard the answer erupt from the abyss of my jet-black soul. 

Fuck no!  After second heart surgery OceanofPDF. 

com  CHALLENGE #8Schedule it in!It’s time to compartmentalize your day. 

Too many of us have become multitaskers,and that’s created a nation of half-asses. 

This will be a three-week challenge. 

During week one, go about your normal schedule, but take notes. 

When do youwork? Are you working nonstop or checking your phone (the Moment app will tellyou)? How long are your meal breaks? When do you exercise, watch TV, or chat tofriends? How long is your commute? Are you driving? I want you to get superdetailed and document it all with timestamps. 

This will be your baseline, and you’llfind plenty of fat to trim. 

Most people waste four to five hours on a given day, andif you can learn to identify and utilize it, you’ll be on your way toward increasedproductivity. 

In week two, build an optimal schedule. 

Lock everything into place in fifteen- tothirty-minute blocks. 

Some tasks will take multiple blocks or entire days. 

Fine. 

When you work, only work on one thing at a time, think about the task in front ofyou and pursue it relentlessly. 

When it comes time for the next task on yourschedule, place that first one aside, and apply the same focus. 

Make sure your meal breaks are adequate but not open-ended, and schedule inexercise and rest too. 

But when it’s time to rest, actually rest. 

No checking email orbullshitting on social media. 

If you are going to work hard you must also rest yourbrain. 

Make notes with timestamps in week two. 

You may still find some residual deadspace. 

By week three, you should have a working schedule that maximizes youreffort without sacrificing sleep. 

Post photos of your schedule, with the hashtags#canthurtme #talentnotrequired. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com   CHAPTER NINE 9. 

UNCOMMON AMONGST UNCOMMONThe anesthesia took hold, and I felt myself wheeling backward until I landed in ascene from my past. 

We were humping through the jungle in the dead of night. 

Ourmovement was stealthy and silent, but swift. 

Had to be. 

He who hits first wins thefight, most of the time. 

We crested a pass, took shelter beneath a thick stand of towering mahogany trees inthe triple canopy jungle, and tracked our targets through night vision goggles. 

Evenwithout sunlight, the tropical heat was intense and sweat slid down the side of myface like dew drops on a window pane. 

I was twenty-seven years old, and myPlatoon and Rambo fever dreams had become real as fuck. 

I blinked twice, exhaled,and on the OIC’s signal, opened fire. 

My entire body reverberated with the rhythm of the M60, a belt-fed machine gun,firing 500–650 rounds per minute. 

As the one-hundred-round belt fed the growlingmachine and flared from the barrel, adrenaline flooded my bloodstream andsaturated my brain. 

My focus narrowed. 

There was nothing else but me, myweapon, and the target I was shredding with zero apologies. 

It was 2002, I was fresh out of BUD/S, and as a full-time Navy SEAL, I was nowofficially one of the world’s most fit and deadly warriors and one of the hardest menalive. 

Or so I thought, but this was years before my descent into the ultra rabbithole. 

September 11th was still a fresh, gaping wound in the American collectiveconsciousness, and its ripple effects changed everything for guys like us. 

Combatwas no longer a mythical state of mind we aspired to. 

It was real and ongoing in themountains, villages, and cities of Afghanistan. 

Meanwhile, we were moored infucking Malaysia, awaiting orders, hoping to join the fight. 

And we trained like it. 

After BUD/S, I moved on to SEAL Qualification Training, where I officially earnedmy Trident before landing in my first platoon. 

Training continued with junglewarfare exercises in Malaysia. 

We rappelled and fast-roped up and down fromhovering helicopters. 

Some men were trained as snipers, and since I was the biggestman in the unit—my weight was back up to 250 pounds by then—I scored the jobof carrying the Pig, the nickname for the M60 because it sounded like the grunt of abarnyard hog. 

     SQT graduation (note the blood stains from the Trident being punched into my chest)Most people dreaded Pig detail, but I was obsessed with that gun. 

The weaponalone was twenty pounds, and each belt of one-hundred rounds weighed in at sevenpounds. 

I carried six to seven of those (one on the gun, four on my waist, and one ina pouch strapped to my rucksack), the weapon, and my fifty-pound ruckeverywhere we went and was expected to move just as fast as everyone else. 

I hadno choice. 

We train as we fight, and live ammo is necessary to mimic true combatso we could perfect the SEAL battle maxim: shoot, move, communicate. 

 That meant keeping barrel discretion on point. 

We couldn’t let our weapon sprayjust anywhere. 

That’s how friendly fire incidents happen, and it takes great musclediscipline and attention to detail to know where you’re aiming in relation to thelocation of your teammates at all times, especially when armed with the Pig. 

Maintaining a high standard of safety and delivering deadly force on-target whenduty calls is what makes an average SEAL a good operator. 

Most people think once you’re a SEAL you’re always in the circle, but that’s nottrue. 

I learned quickly that we were constantly being judged, and the second I wasunsafe, whether I was still a new guy or a veteran operator, I’d be out! I was one ofthree new guys in my first platoon, and one of them had to have his gun taken awaybecause he was so unsafe. 

For ten days, we moved through the Malaysian jungle,sleeping in hammocks, paddling dugouts, carrying our weapons all day and night,and he was stuck hauling a fucking broomstick like the Wicked Witch of the West. 

Even then he couldn’t hack it and wound up getting booted. 

Our officers in that firstplatoon kept everybody honest, and I respected them for it. 

“In combat, nobody just turns into Rambo,” Dana De Coster told me recently. 

Danawas second in command on my first platoon with SEAL Team Five. 

These days he’sDirector of Operations at BUD/S. 

“We push ourselves hard so when bullets do startflying we fall back on really good training, and it’s important that the point wherewe fall back is so high, we know we’re gonna outperform the enemy. 

We may notbecome Rambo, but we’ll be damn close. 

”A lot of people are fascinated by the weaponry and gunfights SEALs utilize andengage in, but that was never my favorite part of the job. 

I was damn good at it, butI preferred going to war with myself. 

I’m talking about strong physical training, andmy first platoon delivered that too. 

We would go on long run-swim-runs mostmornings before work. 

We weren’t just getting miles in either. 

We were competing,and our officers led from the front. 

Our OIC and Dana, his second, were two of thebest athletes in the entire platoon and my Platoon Chief, Chris Beck (who now goesby Kristin Beck, and is one of most famous trans women on Twitter; talk aboutbeing the only!), was a hard motherfucker too. 

“It’s funny,” Dana said, “[the OIC and I] never really talked about our philosophyon PT. 

We just competed. 

I wanted to beat him and he wanted to beat me, and thatgot people talking about how hard we were getting after it. 

”There was never a doubt in my mind that Dana was off his damn rocker. 

Iremember before we shipped out for Indonesia, with stops in Guam, Malaysia,Thailand, and Korea, we did a number of training dives off San Clemente Island. 

Dana was my swim buddy, and one morning he challenged me to do a training divein fifty-five-degree water without a wetsuit because that’s how the predecessors tothe SEALs did it when they prepared the beaches in Normandy for the famous D-Day invasion during World War II. 

“Let’s go old school and dive in shorts with our dive knives,” he said. 

He had the animalistic mentality I thrived on, and I wasn’t about to back down fromthat challenge. 

We swam and dove together all over Southeast Asia, where wetrained elite military units in Malaysia and sharpened the skills of Thai NavySEALs—the crew of frogmen who saved the soccer kids in the cave in the summer of 2018. 

They were engaged with an Islamist insurgency in South Thailand. 

Wherever we deployed, I loved those PT mornings above all else. 

Pretty soon,every man in that platoon was competing against everyone else, but no matter howhard I tried I couldn’t seem to catch our two officers and usually came in thirdplace. 

Didn’t matter. 

It wasn’t important who won because everybody was cappingpersonal bests almost every day, and that’s what stayed with me. 

The power of acompetitive environment to amp up an entire platoon’s commitment andachievement!This was exactly the environment I’d been dreaming of when I classed up forBUD/S. 

We were all living the SEAL ethos, and I couldn’t wait to see where it tookus individually and as a unit once we tagged into the fight. 

But as war raged inAfghanistan, all we could do was sit tight and hope our number was called. 

We were in a Korean bowling alley when we watched the invasion of Iraq together. 

It was depressing as hell. 

We had been training hard for an opportunity like that. 

Our foundation had been reinforced with all that PT, and filled out with robustweapons and tactical training. 

We’d become a deadly unit frothing to be a part ofthe action, and the fact that we were passed over again pissed us all off. 

So we tookit out on one another every morning. 

Navy SEALs were treated like rock stars at the bases we visited around the world,and some of the guys partied like it. 

In fact, most SEALs enjoyed their share of bignights out, but not me. 

I’d gotten into the SEALs by living a Spartan lifestyle andfelt my job at night was to rest, recharge, and get my body and mind right for battleagain the next day. 

I was forever mission-ready, and my attitude earned respectfrom some, but our OIC tried to influence me to let go a little and become “one ofthe boys. 

”I had great respect for our OIC. 

He’d graduated from the Naval Academy and theUniversity of Cambridge. 

He was clearly smart, a stud athlete, and a great leader, onhis way to claiming a coveted spot on DEVGRU, so his opinion mattered to me. 

Itmattered to all of us, because he was responsible for evaluating us and thoseevaluations have a way of following you around and affecting your military careergoing forward. 

On paper, my first evaluation was solid. 

He was impressed with my skills and all-out effort, but he also dropped some off the record wisdom. 

“You know, Goggins,”he said, “you’d understand the job a little better if you hung out with the guys more. 

That’s when I learn the most about operating in the field, hanging with the boys,hearing their stories. 

It’s important to be part of the group. 

”His words were a reality check that hurt. 

Clearly, the OIC, and probably some of theother guys, thought I was a little different. 

Of course I was! I came from fuckingnothing! I didn’t get recruited to the Naval Academy. 

I didn’t even know where thefuck Cambridge was. 

I wasn’t raised around pools. 

I had to teach myself to swim. 

Fuck, I shouldn’t have even been a SEAL, but I made it, and I thought that mademe part of the group, but now I realized I was part of the Teams—not thebrotherhood. 

I had to go out and socialize with the guys after hours to prove my value? That wasa big ask for an introvert like me. 

 Fuck that. 

I’d arrived in that platoon because of my intense dedication and I wasn’t about to letup. 

While people were out at night I was reading up on tactics, weaponry, and war. 

Iwas a perpetual student! In my mind I was training for opportunities that didn’teven exist yet. 

Back then you couldn’t screen to join DEVGRU until after youfinished your second platoon, but I was already preparing for that opportunity, and Irefused to compromise who I was to conform to their unwritten rules. 

DEVGRU (and the Army’s Delta Force) are considered the very best within the bestof special operations. 

They get the tip of the spear missions, like the Osama BinLaden raid, and from that point on, I decided I wouldn’t and couldn’t be satisfiedjust being a vanilla Navy SEAL. 

Yeah, we were all uncommon, hard motherfuckerscompared to civilians, but now I saw I was uncommon even among the uncommon,and if that’s who I was, then so the fuck be it. 

I may as well separate myself evenmore. 

Not long after that evaluation, I won the morning race for the first time. 

Ipassed up Dana and the OIC in the last half mile and never looked back. 

Platoon assignments last for two years, and by the end of our deployment most ofthe guys were ready for a breather before tackling their next platoon, which judgingby the wars we were involved in were almost guaranteed to take them into combat. 

I didn’t want or need a break because the uncommon among uncommon don’t takebreaks!After my first evaluation I started studying the other branches in the military (CoastGuard not included) and read up on their special forces. 

Navy SEALs like to thinkthat we’re the best of them all, but I wanted to see for myself. 

I suspected all thebranches employed a few individuals who stood out in the worst environments. 

Iwas on a hunt to find and train with those guys because I knew they could make mebetter. 

Plus, I’d read that Army Ranger School was known as one of the best, if notthe best, leadership schools in the entire military, so during my first platoon, I putseven chits in with my OIC hoping to get approval to go to Army Ranger Schoolbetween deployments. 

I wanted to sponge more knowledge, I told him, and becomemore skilled as a special operator. 

Chits are special requests, and my first six were ignored. 

I was a new guy, after all,and some thought my focus should remain within Naval Special Warfare, ratherthan stray into the dreaded Army. 

But I’d earned my own reputation after servingtwo years in my first platoon, and my seventh request went up the ladder to the COin charge of Seal Team Five. 

When he signed off, I was in. 

“Goggins,” my OIC said after giving me the good news, “you are the type ofmotherfucker who wishes you were a POW just to see if you have what it takes tolast. 

”He was onto me. 

He knew the kind of person I was becoming—the type of manwilling to challenge myself to the nth degree. 

We shook hands. 

The OIC was off toDEVGRU, and there was a chance we’d meet there soon. 

He told me that with twoongoing wars, for the first time DEVGRU had opened their recruitment process toinclude guys off their first platoon. 

By always searching for more and preparing mymind and body for opportunities that didn’t yet exist, I was one of a handful of menon the West Coast approved by SEAL Team Five brass to screen for Green Team, the training program for DEVGRU, just before I left for Army Ranger School. 

The Green Team screening process unfolds over two days. 

The first day is thephysical fitness portion, which included a three-mile run, a 1,200-meter swim, threeminutes of sit-ups and push-ups, and a max set of pull-ups. 

I smoked everybody,because my first platoon had made me a much stronger swimmer and a betterrunner. 

Day two was the interview, which was more like an interrogation. 

Onlythree men from my screening class of eighteen guys were approved for GreenTeam. 

I was one of them, which theoretically meant that after my second platoonI’d be one step closer to joining DEVGRU. 

I could hardly wait. 

It was December2003, and as imagined, my special forces career was zooming into hyperspacebecause I kept proving myself to be the most uncommon of motherfuckers, andremained on track to become that One Warrior. 

A few weeks later, I arrived in Fort Benning, Georgia, for Army Ranger School. 

Itwas early December, and as the only Navy guy in a class of 308 men, I was greetedwith skepticism by the instructors because a few classes before mine, a couple ofNavy SEALs quit in the middle of training. 

Back then they used to send NavySEALs to Ranger School as punishment, so they may not have been the bestrepresentatives. 

I’d been begging to go, but the instructors didn’t know that yet. 

They thought I was just another cocky special ops guy. 

Within hours they strippedme and everyone else of our uniforms and reputations until we all looked the same. 

Officers lost rank, and minted special forces warriors like me became nobodies witha hell of a lot to prove. 

On day one, we were split into three companies and I was appointed first sergeant incommand of Bravo company. 

I got the job because the original first sergeant hadbeen asked to recite the Ranger Creed after a beat down on the pull-up bar, and hewas so tired he fucked it up. 

To Rangers, their creed is everything. 

Our RangerInstructor (RI) was livid as he took stock of Bravo company, all of us locked atattention. 

“I don’t know where you think you men are, but if you expect to become Rangersthen I expect you to know our creed. 

” His eyes found me. 

“I know for a fact OldNavy here doesn’t know the Ranger Creed. 

”I’d been studying it for months and could have recited it while standing on myhead. 

For effect, I cleared my throat and got loud. 

“Recognizing that I volunteered as a Ranger, fully knowing the hazards of mychosen profession, I will always endeavor to uphold the prestige, honor, and highspirit de corps of the Rangers!”“Very surpri…” He tried to cut me off, but I wasn’t done. 

“Acknowledging the fact that a Ranger is a more elite Soldier who arrives at thecutting edge of battle by land, sea, or air, I accept the fact that as a Ranger mycountry expects me to move further, faster, and fight harder than any other Solider!”The RI nodded with a wry smile, but this time stayed out of my way. 

 “Never shall I fail my comrades! I will always keep myself mentally alert,physically strong, and morally straight, and I will shoulder more than my share ofthe task whatever it may be, 100 percent and then some!“Gallantly will I show the world that I am a specially selected and well-trainedSoldier! My courtesy to superior officers, neatness of dress, and care of equipmentshall set the example for others to follow!“Energetically will I meet the enemies of my country! I shall defeat them on thefield of battle for I am better trained and will fight with all my might! Surrender isnot a Ranger word! I will never leave a fallen comrade to fall into the hands of theenemy and under no circumstances will I ever embarrass my country!“Readily will I display the intestinal fortitude required to fight on to the Rangerobjective and complete the mission though I be the lone survivor!“Rangers lead the way!”I recited all six stanzas, and afterward he shook his head in disbelief, and mulled theideal way to get the last laugh. 

“Congratulations, Goggins,” he said, “you are nowfirst sergeant. 

”He left me there, in front of my platoon, speechless. 

It was now my job to marchour platoon around and make sure every man was prepared for whatever lay in frontof us. 

I became part boss, part big brother, and full-time quasi-instructor. 

In RangerSchool it’s hard enough to get yourself squared away enough to graduate. 

Now Ihad to look after a hundred men and make sure they had their shit together, too. 

Plus, I still had to go through the same evolutions as everyone else, but that was theeasy part and actually gave me a chance to chill out. 

For me the physicalpunishment was more than manageable, but the way I went about accomplishingthose physical tasks had shifted. 

In BUD/S I’d always lead my boat crews, oftenwith tough love, but in general I didn’t care how the guys in the other boat crewswere doing or if they quit. 

This time, I wasn’t just putting out, I was also lookingafter everybody. 

If I saw someone having trouble with navigation, patrolling,keeping up on a run, or staying awake all night, I made sure we all rallied togetherto help. 

Not everybody wanted to. 

The training was so difficult that when someguys weren’t on the clock being graded, they did the bare minimum and foundopportunities to rest and hide. 

In my sixty-nine days at Ranger School I didn’t coastfor a single second. 

I was becoming a true leader. 

The whole point of Ranger School is to give every man a taste of what it takes tolead a high-level team. 

The field exercises were like an operator’s scavenger huntblended with an endurance race. 

Over the course of six testing phases we wereevaluated on navigation, weapons, rope techniques, reconnaissance, and overallleadership. 

The field tests were notorious for their Spartan brutality and cappedthree separate phases of training. 

First, we were split into groups of twelve men and together spent five days and fournights in the foothills for Fort Benning phase. 

We were given very little food to eat—one or two MREs per day—and only a couple of hours sleep per night, as weraced the clock to navigate cross-country terrain between stations where we’d knock off a series of tasks to prove our proficiency in a particular skill. 

Leadershipin the group rotated between men. 

Mountain phase was exponentially harder than Fort Benning. 

Now we weregrouped into teams of twenty-five men to navigate the mountains in north Georgia,and buddy, Appalachia gets cold as fuck in wintertime. 

I’d read stories about blacksoldiers with Sickle Cell Trait dying during Mountain Phase, and the Army wantedme to wear special dog tags with a red casing to alert medics if something wentwrong, but I was leading men and didn’t want my crew to think of me as somesickly child, so the red casing never quite found its way to my dog tags. 

In the mountains we learned how to rappel and rock climb, among othermountaineering skills, and became proficient in ambush techniques and mountainpatrol. 

To prove it we went out on two separate, four-night field training exercises,known as FTXs. 

A storm blew in during our second FTX. 

Thirty-mile-per-hourwinds howled with ice and snow. 

We didn’t haul sleeping bags or warm clothes, andagain we had very little food. 

All we could use to keep warm was a poncho linerand one another, which was an issue because the rancid odor in the air was our own. 

We’d burned so many calories without proper nutrition, we’d lost all our fat andwere incinerating our own muscle mass for fuel. 

The putrid stink made our eyeswater. 

It triggered the gag reflex. 

Visibility narrowed to a few feet. 

Guys wheezed,coughed, and jackhammered, their eyes wide with terror. 

I thought for sure someonewas gonna die from frostbite, hypothermia, or pneumonia that night. 

Whenever you stop to sleep during field tests, rest is brief and you’re required tomaintain security in four directions, but in the face of that storm, Bravo platoonbuckled. 

These were generally very hard men with a ton of pride, but they werefocused on survival above all else. 

I understood the impulse, and the instructorsdidn’t mind because we were in weather emergency mode, but to me that presentedan opportunity to stand apart and lead by example. 

I looked at that winter storm as aplatform to become uncommon among uncommon men. 

No matter who you are, life will present you similar opportunities where you canprove to be uncommon. 

There are people in all walks of life who relish thosemoments, and when I see them I recognize them immediately because they areusually that motherfucker who’s all by himself. 

It’s the suit who’s still at the officeat midnight while everyone else is at the bar, or the badass who hits the gymdirectly after coming off a forty-eight-hour op. 

She’s the wildland firefighter whoinstead of hitting her bedroll, sharpens her chainsaw after working a fire for twenty-four hours. 

That mentality is there for all of us. 

Man, woman, straight, gay, black,white, or purple fucking polkadot. 

All of us can be the person who flies all day andnight only to arrive home to a filthy house, and instead of blaming family orroommates, cleans it up right then because they refuse to ignore duties undone. 

All over the world amazing human beings like that exist. 

It doesn’t take wearing auniform. 

It’s not about all the hard schools they graduated from, all their patchesand medals. 

It’s about wanting it like there’s no tomorrow—because there might notbe. 

It’s about thinking of everybody else before yourself and developing your owncode of ethics that sets you apart from others. 

One of those ethics is the drive to turnevery negative into a positive, and then when shit starts flying, being prepared tolead from the front. 

 My thinking on that Georgia mountaintop was that, in a real-world scenario, a stormlike that would provide the perfect cover for an enemy attack, so I didn’t group upand seek warmth. 

I dialed deeper, welcomed the carnage of ice and snow, and heldthe western perimeter like it was my duty—because it damn well was! And I lovedevery second of it. 

I squinted into the wind, and as hail stung my cheeks, I screamedinto the night from the depths of my misunderstood soul. 

A few guys heard me, popped out of the tree line to the north, and stood tall. 

Thenanother guy emerged to the east, and another on the edge of the south-facing slope. 

They were all shivering, wrapped in their measly poncho liners. 

None of themwanted to be there, but they rose up and did their duty. 

In spite of one of the mostbrutal storms in Ranger School history, we held a complete perimeter until theinstructors radioed us to come in from the cold. 

Literally. 

They put up a circus tent. 

We filed in and huddled up until the storm passed. 

The final weeks in Ranger School are called Florida Phase, a ten-day FTX in whichfifty men navigate the panhandle, GPS point by GPS point, as a single unit. 

Itstarted with a static line jump from an aircraft at 1,500 feet into frigid swamplandsnear Fort Walton Beach. 

We waded and swam across rivers, set up rope bridges, andwith our hands and feet shimmied back to the other side. 

We couldn’t stay dry, andthe water temperature was in the high thirties and low forties. 

We’d all heard thestory that during the winter of 1994 it got so cold, four would-be Rangers died ofhypothermia during Florida Phase. 

Being near the beach, freezing my nuts off,reminded me of Hell Week. 

Whenever we stopped, guys were nut to butt andjackhammering, but as usual, I focused hard and refused to show any weakness. 

This time it wasn’t about taking the souls of our instructors. 

It was about givingcourage to the men who were struggling. 

I’d cross the river six times if that’s whatit took to help one of my guys tie off his rope bridge. 

I’d walk them step-by-stepthrough the process until they could prove their value to the Ranger brass. 

We slept very little, ate even less, and continually knocked off reconnaissance tasks,hitting waypoints, setting up bridges and weapons, and preparing for ambush, whiletaking turns leading a group of fifty men. 

Those men were tired, hungry, cold,frustrated, and they did not want to be there anymore. 

Most were at their ultimateedge, their 100 percent. 

I was getting there too, but even when it wasn’t my turn tolead, I helped out because in those sixty-nine days of Ranger School I learned that ifyou want to call yourself a leader, that’s what it takes. 

A true leader stays exhausted, abhors arrogance, and never looks down on theweakest link. 

He fights for his men and leads by example. 

That’s what it meant tobe uncommon among uncommon. 

It meant being one of the best and helping yourmen find their best too. 

It was a lesson I’d wish sunk in a lot deeper, because in justa few more weeks I’d be challenged in the leadership department and come up wellshort. 

Ranger School was so demanding, and the standards were so high that only ninety-six men graduated out of a class of 308 candidates, and the majority of them werefrom Bravo platoon. 

I was awarded Enlisted Honor Man and received a 100 percentpeer evaluation. 

To me that meant even more, because my classmates, my fellowknuckle draggers, had valued my leadership in harsh conditions, and one look in themirror revealed just how harsh those conditions were. 

     Certificate for being the Enlisted Honor Man at Ranger SchoolI lost fifty-six pounds in Ranger School. 

I looked like death. 

My cheeks weresunken. 

My eyes bugged out. 

I had no bicep muscle left. 

All of us were emaciated. 

Guys had trouble running down the block. 

Men who could do forty pull-ups in onego now struggled to do a single one. 

The Army expected that and scheduled threedays between the end of Florida Phase and graduation to fatten us up before ourfamilies flew in to celebrate. 

As soon as the final FTX was called, we hustled straight to chow hall. 

I piled mytray with doughnuts, fries, and cheeseburgers, and went looking for the milkmachine. 

After drinking all those damn chocolate shakes when I was down and out,my body had become lactose intolerant, and I hadn’t touched dairy in years. 

Butthat day I was like a little child, unable to stifle a primordial yearning for a glass ofmilk. 

I found the milk machine, pulled the lever down and watched, confused, as itfunneled out, chunky as cottage cheese. 

I shrugged and sniffed. 

It smelled all kindsof wrong, but I remember downing that spoiled milk like it was a fresh glass ofsweet tea, courtesy of another hellacious special forces school that put us through somuch, by the end anybody who survived was grateful for their cold glass of spoiledmilk. 

***Most people take a couple weeks off to recover from Ranger School and put someweight back on. 

Most people do that. 

The day of graduation, on Valentine’s Day, Iflew into Coronado to meet up with my second platoon. 

Once again, I looked at thatlack of lag time as an opportunity to be uncommon. 

Not that anybody else waswatching, but when it comes to mindset, it doesn’t matter where other people’sattention lies. 

I had my own uncommon standards to live up to. 

At every stop I’d made in the SEALs, from BUD/S to that first platoon to RangerSchool, I was known as a hard motherfucker, and when the OIC in my secondplatoon put me in charge of PT, I was encouraged because it told me that once againI’d landed with a group of men who were driven to put out and get better. 

Inspired, Ibent my brain to think of evil shit we could do to get us battle ready. 

This time weall knew we’d deploy to Iraq, and I made it my mission to help us become thehardest SEAL platoon in the fight. 

That was a high bar, set by the original NavySEAL legend still lodged like an anchor deep in my brain. 

Our legend suggested wewere the type of men to swim five miles on Monday, run twenty miles on Tuesday,and climb a 14,000-foot peak on Wednesday, and my expectations were skyfucking high. 

For the first week, guys rallied at 5 a. 

m. 

for a run-swim-run or a twelve-mile ruck,followed by a lap through the O-Course. 

We carried logs over the berm andhammered hundreds of push-ups. 

I had us doing the hard shit, the real shit, theworkouts that made us SEALs. 

Each day the workouts were harder than the last andover the course of a week or two, that wore people down. 

Every alpha male inspecial ops wants to be the best at everything they do, but with me leading PT they couldn’t always be the best. 

Because I never gave them a break. 

We were allbreaking down and showing weakness. 

That was the idea, but they didn’t want to bechallenged like that every day. 

During the second week, attendance flagged and theOIC and the Chief of our platoon took me aside. 

“Look, dude,” our OIC said, “this is stupid. 

What are we doing?”“We aren’t in BUD/S anymore, Goggins,” said the Chief. 

To me, this wasn’t about being in BUD/S, this was about living the SEAL ethos andearning the Trident every day. 

These guys wanted to do their own PT, whichtypically meant hitting the gym and getting big. 

They weren’t interested in beingpunished physically, and definitely weren’t interested in being pushed to meet mystandard. 

Their reaction shouldn’t have surprised me, but it sure as hell disappointedme and made me lose all respect for their leadership. 

I understood that not everyone wanted to work out like an animal for the rest oftheir career, because I didn’t want to do that shit either! But what put distancebetween me and almost everybody else in that platoon is that I didn’t let my desirefor comfort rule me. 

I was determined to go to war with myself to find morebecause I believed it was our duty to maintain a BUD/S mentality and proveourselves every day. 

Navy SEALs are revered the world over and are thought to bethe hardest men that God ever created, but that conversation made me realize thatwasn’t always true. 

I had just come from Ranger School, a place where nobody has any rank at all. 

Even if a General had classed up, he’d have been in the same clothes we all had towear, that of an enlisted man on day one of basic fucking training. 

We were allmaggots reborn, with no future and no past, starting at zero. 

I loved that conceptbecause it sent a message that no matter what we’d accomplished in the outsideworld, as far as the Rangers were concerned we weren’t shit. 

And I claimed thatmetaphor for myself, because it’s always and forever true. 

No matter what you or Iachieve, in sports, business, or life, we can’t be satisfied. 

Life is too dynamic agame. 

We’re either getting better or we’re getting worse. 

Yes, we need to celebrateour victories. 

There’s power in victory that’s transformative, but after ourcelebration we should dial it down, dream up new training regimens, new goals, andstart at zero the very next day. 

I wake up every day as if I am back in BUD/S, dayone, week one. 

Starting at zero is a mindset that says my refrigerator is never full, and it never willbe. 

We can always become stronger and more agile, mentally and physically. 

Wecan always become more capable and more reliable. 

Since that’s the case we shouldnever feel that our work is done. 

There is always more to do. 

Are you an experienced scuba diver? Great, shed your gear, take a deep breath andbecome a one-hundred-foot free diver. 

Are you a badass triathlete? Cool, learn howto rock climb. 

Are you enjoying a wildly successful career? Wonderful, learn a newlanguage or skill. 

Get a second degree. 

Always be willing to embrace ignorance andbecome the dumb fuck in the classroom again, because that is the only way toexpand your body of knowledge and body of work. 

It’s the only way to expandyour mind. 

 During week two of my second platoon, my Chief and OIC showed their cards. 

Itwas devastating to hear that they didn’t feel that we needed to earn our status everyday. 

Sure, all the guys I worked with over the years were relatively hard guys andhighly skilled. 

They enjoyed the challenges of the job, the brotherhood, and beingtreated like superstars. 

They all loved being SEALs, but some weren’t interested instarting at zero because just by qualifying to breathe rare air they were alreadysatisfied. 

Now, that is a very common way of thinking. 

Most people in the world, ifthey ever push themselves at all, are willing to push themselves only so far. 

Oncethey reach a cushy plateau, they chill the fuck out and enjoy their rewards, butthere’s another phrase for that mentality. 

It’s called getting soft, and that I could notabide. 

As far as I was concerned I had my own reputation to uphold, and when the rest ofthe platoon opted out of my custom made hellscape, the chip on my shoulder greweven bigger. 

I ramped up my workouts and vowed to put out so hard it would hurttheir fucking feelings. 

As head of PT, that was not in my job description. 

I wassupposed to inspire guys to give more. 

Instead, I saw what I considered a glaringweakness and let them know I wasn’t impressed. 

In one short week, my leadership regressed light years from where I was in RangerSchool. 

I lost touch with my situational awareness (SA) and didn’t respect the menin my platoon enough. 

As a leader, I was trying to bull my way through, and theybucked against that. 

Nobody gave an inch, including the officers. 

I suppose all of ustook a path of least resistance. 

I just didn’t notice it because physically I was goingharder than ever. 

And I had one guy with me. 

Sledge was a hard motherfucker who grew up in SanBernardino, the son of a firefighter and a secretary, and, like me, he taught himselfto swim in order to pass the swim test and qualify for BUD/S. 

He was only a yearolder but was already in his fourth platoon. 

He was also a heavy drinker, a littleoverweight, and looking to change his life. 

The morning after the Chief, the OIC,and I had words, Sledge showed up at 5 a. 

m. 

ready to roll. 

I’d been there since 4:30a. 

m. 

and had a lather of sweat working already. 

“I like what you’re doing with the workouts,” he said, “and I wanna keep doingthem. 

”“Roger that. 

”From then on, no matter where we were stationed, whether that was Coronado,Niland, or Iraq, we got after it every single morning. 

We’d meet up at 4 a. 

m. 

and getto it. 

Sometimes that meant running up the side of a mountain before hitting the O-Course at high speed and carrying logs up and over the berm and down the beach. 

In BUD/S, usually six men carried those logs. 

We did it with just the two of us. 

Onanother day we rocked a pull-up pyramid, hitting sets of one, all the way up totwenty, and back down to one again. 

After every other set we’d climb a rope fortyfeet high. 

One thousand pull-ups before breakfast became our new mantra. 

At first,Sledge struggled to rock one set of ten pull-ups. 

Within months he’d lost thirty-fivepounds and was hitting one hundred sets of ten!In Iraq, it was impossible to get long runs in, so we lived in the weight room. 

Wedid hundreds of deadlifts and spent hours on the hip sled. 

We went way beyond overtraining. 

We didn’t care about muscle fatigue or breakdown because after acertain point we were training our minds, not our bodies. 

My workouts weren’tdesigned to make us fast runners or to be the strongest men on the mission. 

I wastraining us to take torture so we’d remain relaxed in extraordinarily uncomfortableenvironments. 

And shit did get uncomfortable from time to time. 

Despite the clear divide within our platoon (Sledge and me vs. 

everyone else) weoperated well together in Iraq. 

Off duty, however, there was a huge gulf betweenwho the two of us were becoming and who I thought the men in my platoon were,and my disappointment showed. 

I wore my shitty attitude around like a shroud, thusearning me the platoon nickname David “Leave Me Alone” Goggins, and neverwoke up to realize that my disappointment was my own problem. 

Not myteammates’ fault. 

 Platoon dynamics aside, there was still a job to do in Iraq That’s the drawback of becoming uncommon amongst uncommon. 

You can pushyourself to a place that is beyond the current capability or temporal mindset of thepeople you work with, and that’s okay. 

Just know that your supposed superiority isa figment of your own ego. 

So don’t lord it over them, because it won’t help youadvance as a team or as an individual in your field. 

Instead of getting angry thatyour colleagues can’t keep up, help pick your colleagues up and bring them withyou!We are all fighting the same battle. 

All of us are torn between comfort andperformance, between settling for mediocrity or being willing to suffer in order tobecome our best self, all the damn time. 

We make those kinds of decisions a dozenor more times each day. 

My job as head of PT wasn’t to demand that my guys liveup to the Navy SEAL legend I loved, it was to help them become the best version ofthemselves. 

But I never listened, and I didn’t lead. 

Instead, I got angry and showedup my teammates. 

For two years I played the tough guy and never took a step backwith a calm mind to address my original error. 

I had countless opportunities tobridge the gap I’d helped create, but I never did, and it cost me. 

I didn’t realize any of that right away, because after my second platoon, I wasordered to freefall school, then made an assaults instructor. 

Both were postsscheduled to prep me for Green Team. 

Assaults was critical because most peoplewho get cut from Green Team are dismissed for sloppy house runs. 

They move tooslow when clearing buildings, are too easily exposed, or are amped up and triggerhappy and end up shooting friendly targets. 

Teaching those skills made me clinical,stealthy, and calm in confined environments, and I expected to receive my orders totrain with DEVGRU in Dam Neck, Virginia, any day, but they never came. 

Theother two guys who’d rocked the screening with me received their orders. 

Minewent AWOL. 

I called leadership at Dam Neck. 

They told me to screen again, and that’s when Iknew something was off. 

I thought about the process I’d been through. 

Did I reallyexpect to do better? I smoked that shit. 

But then I remembered the actual interview,which felt more like an interrogation with two men playing good cop, bad cop. 

They didn’t probe my skillset or Navy knowhow. 

Eighty-five percent of theirquestions had nothing to do with my ability to operate whatsoever. 

The bulk of thatinterview was about my race. 

“We are a bunch of good ol’ boys,” one of them said, “and we need to know howyou’re gonna handle hearing black jokes, bro. 

”Most of their questions were a variation on that one theme and through it all, Ismiled and thought, How are you white boys gonna feel when I’m the baddestmotherfucker in here? But that’s not what I said, and it wasn’t because I wasintimidated or uncomfortable. 

I was more at home in that interview than anywhereI’d been in the military, because for the first time in my life it was out in the fuckingopen. 

They weren’t trying to pretend that being one of only a handful of black guysin perhaps the most revered military organization in the world didn’t have its ownunique set of challenges. 

One guy was challenging me with his aggressive postureand tone, the other guy kept it cool, but they were both being real. 

There were twoor three black men in DEVGRU already and they were telling me that entry intotheir inner circle required my signing off on certain terms and conditions. 

And in asick way, I loved that message and the challenge that came with it. 

 DEVGRU was a hard ass, renegade crew within the SEALs, and they wanted it tostay that way. 

They didn’t want to civilize anybody. 

They didn’t want to evolve orchange, and I knew where I was and what I was getting myself into. 

This crew wasresponsible for the most dangerous, tip of the spear missions. 

It was a white man’sunderworld, and these guys needed to know how I’d act if someone started to fuckwith me. 

They needed assurances I could control my emotions, and once I sawthrough their language into the greater purpose, I couldn’t be offended by their act. 

“Look, I’ve experienced racism my entire life,” I replied, “and there is nothing anyof you fuckers can say to me that I haven’t heard twenty times before, but be ready. 

Because I’m coming right the fuck back at you!” At the time, they seemed to likethe sound of that. 

Trouble is, when you’re a black guy giving it back it usuallydoesn’t go over nearly as well. 

I will never know why I didn’t receive my orders for Green Team, and it doesn’tmatter. 

We can’t control all the variables in our lives. 

It’s about what we do withopportunities revoked or presented to us that determine how a story ends. 

Instead ofthinking, I crushed the screening process once, I can do it again, I decided to startat zero and screen for Delta Force—the Army’s version of DEVGRU, instead. 

Delta Selection is rigorous, and I’d always been intrigued by it due to the elusivenature of the group. 

Unlike SEALs, you never heard about Delta. 

The screening forDelta Selection included an IQ test, a complete military resume including myqualifications and war experience, and my evaluations. 

I pulled all of that togetherin a few days, knowing that I was competing against the best guys from everymilitary branch and that only the cream would be extended an invitation. 

My Deltaorders came through in a matter of weeks. 

Not long after that, I landed in themountains of West Virginia ready to compete for a spot among the Army’s verybest soldiers. 

Strangely, there was no yelling or screaming in the Delta void. 

There was no musterand no OICs. 

The men that showed up there were all self-starters and our orderswere chalked on a board hanging in the barracks. 

For three days we weren’t allowedto leave the compound. 

Our focus was rest and acclimatization, but on day four, PTstarted up with the basic screening test, which included two minutes of push-ups,two minutes of sit-ups, and a timed two-mile run. 

They expected everyone to meet aminimum standard, and those that didn’t were sent home. 

From there things gotimmediately and progressively more difficult. 

In fact, later that same night we hadour first road march. 

Like everything in Delta, officially the distance was unknown,but I believe it was about an eighteen-mile course from start to finish. 

It was cold and very dark when all 160 of us took off, strapped with around forty-pound rucksacks. 

Most guys started out in a slow march, content to pace themselvesand hike it out. 

I took off hot, and in the first quarter mile left everyone behind. 

Isaw an opportunity to be uncommon and seized it, and I finished about thirtyminutes before anybody else. 

Delta Selection is the best orienteering course in the world. 

For the next ten days wehammered PT in the morning and worked on advanced land navigation skills intothe night. 

They taught us how to get from A to B by reading the terrain instead ofroads and trails on a map. 

We learned to read fingers and cuts, and that if you gethigh you want to stay high. 

We were taught to follow water. 

When you start reading the land this way, your map comes alive, and for the first time in my life I becamegreat at orienteering. 

We learned to judge distance and how to draw our owntopographic maps. 

At first we were assigned an instructor to tail through thewildlands, and those instructors hauled ass. 

For the next few weeks we were on ourown. 

Technically, we were still practicing, but we were also being graded andwatched to make sure we were moving cross-country instead of taking roads. 

It all culminated with an extended final exam in the field that lasted seven days andnights, if we even made it that far. 

This wasn’t a team effort. 

Each of us was on ourown to use our map and compass to navigate from one waypoint to the next. 

Therewas a Humvee at every stop and the cadres (our instructors and evaluators) therenoted our time and gave us the next set of coordinates. 

Each day was its own uniquechallenge, and we never knew how many points we’d have to navigate before thetest was done. 

Plus, there was an unknown time limit that only the cadres wereprivy to. 

At the finish line we weren’t told if we passed or failed. 

Instead we weredirected to one of two covered Humvees. 

The good truck took you to the next camp,the bad truck motored back to base, where you would have to pack your shit andhead home. 

Most of the time I didn’t know if I made it for sure until the truckstopped. 

By day five I was one of roughly thirty guys still in consideration for Delta Force. 

There were only three days left and I was rocking every test, coming in at leastninety-minutes before drop-dead time. 

The final test would be a forty-mile ball-kicker of a land navigation, and I was looking forward to that, but first I had workto do. 

I splashed through washes, huffed up sloped woodlands, and rambled alongridgelines, point-to-point until the unthinkable happened. 

I got lost. 

I was on thewrong ridge. 

I double checked my map and compass and looked across a valley tothe correct one, due south. 

Roger that!For the first time, the clock became a factor. 

I didn’t know the drop-dead time, butknew I was cutting it close, so I sprinted down a steep ravine but lost my footing. 

My left foot jammed between two boulders, I rolled over my ankle and felt it pop. 

The pain was immediate. 

I checked my watch, gritted my teeth, and laced my boottight as quickly as I could, then hobbled up a steep hillside to the correct ridge. 

On the final stretch to the finish, my ankle blew up so bad I had to untie my boot torelieve the pain. 

I moved slow, convinced I would be sent home. 

I was wrong. 

MyHumvee unloaded us at the second to last base camp of Delta Selection, where Iiced my ankle all night knowing that thanks to my injury, the next day’s landnavigation test was likely beyond my capability. 

But I didn’t quit. 

I showed up,fought to stay in the mix, but missed my time on one of the early checkpoints andthat was that. 

I didn’t hang my head, because injuries happen. 

I’d given iteverything I had and when you handle business like that, your effort will not gounnoticed. 

Delta cadres are like robots. 

Throughout Selection they didn’t show any personality,but as I was getting ready to leave the compound, one of the officers in chargecalled me into his office. 

 “Goggins,” he said, extending his hand, “you are a stud! We want you to heal up,come back, and try again. 

We believe you will be a great addition to Delta Forcesomeday. 

”But when? I came to from my second heart surgery in a billowing cloud ofanesthesia. 

I looked over my right shoulder to an IV drip and followed the flow tomy veins. 

I was wired to the medical mind. 

Beeping heart monitors recorded data totell a story in a language beyond my comprehension. 

If only I were fluent, maybeI’d know if my heart was finally whole, if there would ever be a “someday. 

” Iplaced my hand over my heart, closed my eyes and listened for clues. 

After leaving Delta, I went back to the SEAL Teams and was assigned to landwarfare as an instructor instead of a warrior. 

At first my morale flagged. 

Men wholacked my skills, commitment, and athletic ability were in the field in two countriesand I was moored in no-man’s-land, wondering how it had all gone so haywire soquickly. 

It felt like I’d hit a glass ceiling, but had it always been there or did I slideit into place myself? The truth was somewhere in between. 

I realized from living in Brazil, Indiana, that prejudice is everywhere. 

There is apiece of it in every person and each and every organization, and if you are the onlyin any given situation, it’s on you to decide how you’re going to handle it becauseyou can’t make it go away. 

For years, I used it to fuel me because there’s a lot ofpower in being the only. 

It forces you to juice your own resources and to believe inyourself in the face of unfair scrutiny. 

It increases the degree of difficulty, whichmakes every success that much sweeter. 

That’s why I continually put myself insituations where I knew I would encounter it. 

I fed off being the only one in a room. 

I brought the war to people and watched my excellence explode small minds. 

Ididn’t sit back and cry about being the only. 

I took action, said go fuck yourself, andused all the prejudice I felt as dynamite to blow up those walls. 

But that kind of raw material will only get you so far in life. 

I was soconfrontational I created needless enemies along the way, and I believe that’s whatlimited my access to the top SEAL Teams. 

With my career at a crossroads, I didn’thave time to dwell on those mistakes. 

I had to find higher ground and turn thenegative I’d created into another positive. 

I didn’t just accept land warfare duty, Iwas the best instructor I could possibly be, and on my own time I created newopportunities for myself by launching my ultra quest, which revived my stalledcareer. 

I was right back on track until I learned I’d been born with a broken heart. 

Yet there was a positive side to that too. 

Tucked into my post-op hospital bed, Ilooked to be fading in and out of consciousness, as conversations between doctors,nurses, my wife, and mother bled into one another like white noise. 

They had noclue that I was wide awake the whole time, listening to my wounded heart beat, andsmiling inside. 

Knowing I finally had definitive, scientific proof that I was asuncommon as any motherfucker who has ever lived. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com  CHALLENGE #9This one’s for the unusual motherfuckers in this world. 

A lot of people think thatonce they reach a certain level of status, respect, or success, that they’ve made it inlife. 

I’m here to tell you that you always have to find more. 

Greatness is notsomething that if you meet it once it stays with you forever. 

That shit evaporateslike a flash of oil in a hot pan. 

If you truly want to become uncommon amongst the uncommon, it will requiresustaining greatness for a long period of time. 

It requires staying in constant pursuitand putting out unending effort. 

This may sound appealing but will requireeverything you have to give and then some. 

Believe me, this is not for everyonebecause it will demand singular focus and may upset the balance in your life. 

That’s what it takes to become a true overachiever, and if you are alreadysurrounded by people who are at the top of their game, what are you going to dodifferently to stand out? It’s easy to stand out amongst everyday people and be a bigfish in a small pond. 

It is a much more difficult task when you are a wolfsurrounded by wolves. 

This means not only getting into Wharton Business School, but being ranked #1 inyour class. 

It means not just graduating BUD/S, but becoming Enlisted Honor Manin Army Ranger School then going out and finishing Badwater. 

Torch the complacency you feel gathering around you, your coworkers, andteammates in that rare air. 

Continue to put obstacles in front of yourself, becausethat’s where you’ll find the friction that will help you grow even stronger. 

Beforeyou know it, you will stand alone. 

#canthurtme #uncommonamongstuncommon. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com   CHAPTER TEN 10. 

THE EMPOWERMENT OF FAILUREOn September 27, 2012, I stood in a makeshift gym on the second floor of 30Rockefeller Center prepared to break the world record for pull-ups in a twenty-four-hour period. 

That was the plan, anyway. 

Savannah Guthrie was there, along with anofficial from the Guinness Book of World Records and Matt Lauer (yeah, thatfucking guy). 

Again, I was gunning to raise money—a lot of money this time—forthe Special Operations Warrior Foundation, but I also wanted that record. 

To get it Ihad to perform under The Today Show spotlight. 

The number in my head was 4,020 pull-ups. 

Sounds superhuman, right? Did to metoo, until I dissected it and realized if I could knock out six pull-ups on the minute,every minute, for twenty-four hours, I’d shatter it. 

That’s roughly ten seconds ofeffort, and fifty seconds of rest, each minute. 

It wouldn’t be easy, but I considered itdoable given the work I’d put in. 

Over the past five to six months, I’d rocked over40,000 pull-ups and was stoked to be on the precipice of another huge challenge. 

After all the ups and downs since my second heart surgery, I needed this. 

The good news was the surgery worked. 

For the first time in my life I had a fullyfunctioning heart muscle, and I wasn’t in a rush to run or ride. 

I was patient with myrecovery. 

The Navy wouldn’t clear me to operate anyway, and in order to stay in theSEALs I had to accept a non-deployable, non-combat job. 

Admiral Winters kept mein recruiting for two more years, and I remained on the road, shared my story withwilling ears, and worked to win hearts and minds. 

But all I really wanted to do waswhat I was trained to do, and that’s fight! I tried to salve that wound with trips to thegun range, but shooting targets only made me feel worse. 

In 2011, after recruiting for four-plus years and spending two and a half years onthe disabled list due to my heart issues, I was finally medically cleared to operateagain. 

Admiral Winters offered to send me anywhere I wanted to go. 

He knew mysacrifices and my dreams, and I told him I had unfinished business with Delta. 

Hesigned my papers, and after a five-year wait, my someday had arrived. 

   Awarded the Meritorious Service Medal for my work in recruiting     Chosen as Sailor of the Quarter, January to March 2010Once again, I dropped into Appalachia for Delta Selection. 

In 2006, after I smokedthe eighteen-mile road ruck on our first real day of work, I heard some well-intentioned blowback from some of the other guys who were tapped into the rumormill. 

In Delta Selection everything is a secret. 

Yes, there are clear tasks and trainingbut nobody tells you how long the tasks are or will be (even the eighteen-mile ruckwas a best estimate based on my own navigation), and only the cadres know howthey evaluate their candidates. 

According to the rumor mill, they use that first ruckas a baseline to calculate how long each navigation task should take. 

Meaning ifyou go hard you’ll eat away at your own margin for error. 

This time, I had that intelgoing in, and I could have played it safe and taken my time, but I wasn’t about to goout among those great men and give a half-assed effort. 

I went out even harder so Icould make sure they saw my very best, and I broke my own course record(according to that reliable rumor mill) by nine minutes. 

Rather than hear it from me, I reached out to one of the guys who was in DeltaSelection with me, and below is his first-hand account of how that ruck went down:  Before I can talk about the road march, I have to give a little bit of context in the  days leading up to it. 

Showing up to Selection you have no idea what to expect,  everyone hears stories but you do not have a complete grasp of what you are  about to go through…I remember arriving at an airport waiting for a bus and  everyone was hanging out bullshitting. 

For many people it is a reunion of  friends that you haven’t seen in years. 

This is also where you start sizing  everyone up. 

I remember a majority of the people talking or relaxing, there was  one person who was sitting on his bag, looking intense. 

That person I would  later find out was David Goggins, you could tell right from the start he would be  one of the guys at the end. 

Being a runner, I recognized him, but didn’t really  put it all together until after the first few days. 

There are several events that you know you have to do just to start the course;  one of those is the road march. 

Without getting into specific distances, I knew it  was going to be fairly far but was comfortable with running a majority of it. 

Coming into Selection, I had been in Special Forces for a majority of my career  and it was rare when someone finished before me in a road march. 

I was  comfortable with a ruck on my back. 

When we started it was a little cold and  very dark, and as we took off I was where I was most comfortable, out front. 

Within the first quarter mile a guy blew by me, I thought to myself, “No way he  could keep that pace. 

” But I could see the light on his headlamp continue to pull  away; I figured I would see him in a few miles after the course crushed him. 

   This particular road march course has a reputation of being brutal; there was one  hill that as I was going up I could almost reach out in front of me and touch the  ground, it was that steep. 

At this point, there was only one guy in front of me  and I saw footprints that were twice as long as my stride length. 

I was in awe,  my exact thought was, “This is the craziest shit I have seen; that dude ran up  this hill. 

” Throughout the next couple of hours, I was expecting to come around  a corner and find him laid up on the side of the road, but that never happened. 

Once finished, I was laying out my gear and I saw David hanging out. 

He had  been done for quite a while. 

Though Selection is an individual event, he was the  first to give a high five and say, “Nice work. 

”  —T, in an email dated 06/25/2018That performance left an impression beyond the guys in my Selection class. 

I heardrecently from Hawk, another SEAL, that some Army guys he worked with ondeployment were still talking about that ruck, almost like it is an urban legend. 

From there I continued to smash through Delta Selection at or near the top of theclass. 

My land navigation skills were better than they’d ever been, but that doesn’tmean it was easy. 

Roads were off limits, there was no flat ground, and for days webushwhacked up and down steep slopes, in below-freezing temperatures, takingwaypoints, reading maps, and the countless peaks, ridges, and draws that all lookedthe same. 

We moved through thick brush and deep snow banks, splashed throughicy creeks, and slalomed the winter skeletons of towering trees. 

It was painful,challenging, and fucking beautiful, and I was smoking it, mashing every test theycould conjure. 

On the second to last day of Delta Selection, I hit my first four points as fast asusual. 

Most days there were five waypoints to hit in total, so when I got my fifth Iwas beyond confident. 

In my mind, I was the black Daniel Boone. 

I plotted mypoint and moseyed down another steep grade. 

One way to navigate foreign terrain isto track power lines, and I could see that one of those lines in the distance leddirectly to my fifth, and final point. 

I hustled down country, tracked the line, turnedmy conscious mind off, and started dreaming ahead. 

I knew I was going to rock thefinal exam—that forty-mile land navigation I didn’t even get to attempt last timebecause I busted my ankle two days before. 

I considered my graduation a foregoneconclusion, and after that I’d be running and gunning in an elite unit again. 

As Ivisualized it, it became all the more real, and my imagination took me far awayfrom the Appalachian Mountains. 

The thing about following the power supply is you’d better make damn sure you’reon the right line! According to my training, I was supposed to be constantlychecking my map, so if I made a misstep I could re-adjust and head in the rightdirection without losing too much time, but I was so overconfident I forgot to dothat, and I didn’t chart backstops either. 

By the time I woke from fantasy land, I wasway off course and almost out of bounds!I went into panic mode, found my location on the map, humped it to the right powerline, sprinted to the top of the mountain and kept running all the way to my fifthpoint. 

I still had ninety minutes until drop-dead time but when I got close to the nextHumvee I saw another guy heading back toward me!“Where you headed,” I asked as I jogged over. 

 “I’m off to my sixth point,” he said. 

“Shit, there’s not five points today?!”“Nah, there’s six today, brother. 

”I checked my watch. 

I had a little over forty minutes before they called time. 

Ireached the Humvee, took down the coordinates for checkpoint six and studied themap. 

Thanks to my fuck up, I had two clear options. 

I could play by the rules andmiss drop-dead time or I could break the rules, use the roads at my disposal, andgive myself a chance. 

The one thing on my side was that in special operations theyprize a thinking shooter, a soldier willing to do what it takes to meet an objective. 

All I could do was hope they’d have mercy on me. 

I plotted the best possible routeand took the fuck off. 

I skirted the woods, used the roads, and whenever I heard atruck rumbling in the near distance, I took cover. 

A half hour later, at the crest of yetanother mountain, I could see the sixth point, our finish line. 

According to mywatch, I had five minutes left. 

I flew downhill, sprinting all out, and made drop-dead by one minute. 

As I caughtmy breath, our crew was divided and loaded into the covered beds of two separateHumvees. 

At first glance, my group of guys looked pretty squared away, but givenwhen and where I received my sixth point, every cadre in the place had to know I’dskirted protocol. 

I didn’t know what to think. 

Was I still in or assed out?At Delta Selection, one way to be sure you’re out is if you feel speed bumps after aday’s work. 

Speed bumps mean you’re back at the base, and you’re heading homeearly. 

That day, when we felt the first one jar us out of our hopes and dreams, someguys started cursing, others had tears in their eyes. 

I just shook my head. 

“Goggins, what the fuck are you doing here?” One guy asked. 

He was shocked tosee me sitting alongside him, but I was resigned to my reality because I’d beendaydreaming about graduating Delta training and being a part of the force when Ihadn’t even finished Selection!“I didn’t do what they told me to do,” I said. 

“I fucking deserve to go home. 

”“Bullshit! You are one of the best guys out here. 

They’re making a huge mistake. 

”I appreciated his outrage. 

I expected to make it too, but I couldn’t be upset by theirdecision. 

Delta brass weren’t looking for men who could pass a class with a C, B+,or even an A- effort. 

They only accepted A+ students, and if you fucked up anddelivered a performance that was below your capability they sent you packing. 

Shit,if you daydream for a split second on the battlefield, that could mean your life andthe life of one of your brothers. 

I understood that. 

“No. 

It was my mistake,” I said. 

“I got this far by staying focused and delivering mybest, and I’m going home because I lost focus. 

” ***It was time to go back to being a SEAL. 

For the next two years I based in Honoluluas part of a clandestine transport unit called SDV, for SEAL Delivery Vehicles. 

 Operation Red Wings is the best known SDV mission, and you only heard about itbecause it was such big news. 

Most SDV work happens in the shadows, and wellout of sight. 

I fit in well over there, and it was great to be back operating again. 

Ilived on Ford Island, with a view of Pearl Harbor right out my living room window. 

Kate and I had split up, so now I was really living that Spartan life, and still wakingup at 5 a. 

m. 

to run into work. 

I had two routes, an eight-miler and a ten-miler, butno matter which I took my body didn’t react too well. 

After only a few miles, I’dfeel intense neck pain and dizzy spells. 

There were several times during my runsthat I would have to sit down due to vertigo. 

For years I’d harbored a suspicion that we all had a limit on the miles we could runbefore a full-body breakdown, and I wondered if I was closing in on mine. 

My bodyhad never felt so tight. 

I had a knot on the base of my skull that I first noticed aftergraduating BUD/S. 

A decade later it had doubled in size. 

I had knots above my hipflexors too. 

I went to the doctor to get everything checked out, but they weren’teven tumors, much less malignant. 

When the doctors cleared me of mortal danger, Irealized I’d have to live with them and try to forget about long-distance running fora while. 

When an activity or exercise that you’ve always relied on gets taken away fromyou, like running was for me, it’s easy to get stuck in a mental rut and stop doingany exercise at all, but I didn’t have a quitter’s mentality. 

I gravitated toward thepull-up bar and replicated the workouts I used to do with Sledge. 

It was an exercisethat allowed me to push myself and didn’t make me dizzy because I could take abreak between sets. 

After a while I Googled around to see if there was a pull-uprecord within reach. 

That’s when I read about Stephen Hyland’s many pull-uprecords, including the twenty-four-hour record of 4,020. 

At the time I was known as an ultra runner, and I didn’t want to be known for justone thing. 

Who does? Nobody thought of me as an all-around athlete, and thisrecord could change that dynamic. 

How many people are capable of running 100,150, even 200 miles and also knocking out over 4,000 pull-ups in a day? I called theSpecial Operations Warrior Foundation and asked if I could help raise a bit moremoney. 

They were thrilled, and next thing I knew, a contact of mine used hernetworking skills to book me on the damn Today Show. 

To prepare for the attempt I did 400 pull-ups a day during the week, which took meabout seventy minutes. 

On Saturday I did 1,500 pull-ups, in sets of five to ten repsover three hours, and on Sunday I dialed it back to 750. 

All that work strengthenedmy lats, triceps, biceps, and back, prepared my shoulder and elbow joints to takeextreme punishment, helped me develop a powerful gorilla-type grip, and built upmy lactic acid tolerance so my muscles could still function long after they wereoverworked. 

As game day approached, I shortened recovery and started doing fivepull-ups every thirty seconds for two hours. 

Afterward my arms fell to my side,limp as overstretched rubber bands. 

On the eve of my record attempt, my mom and uncle flew into New York City tohelp crew me, and we were all systems go until the SEALs nearly killed my TodayShow appearance at the last minute. 

No Easy Day, a first-hand account of theOsama Bin Laden raid, had just come out. 

It was written by one of the operators inthe DEVGRU  unit that got it done, and Naval Special Warfare brass were nothappy. 

Special Operators are not supposed to share details of the work we do in the field with the general public, and lots of people in the Teams resented that book. 

Iwas given a direct order to pull out of the appearance, which didn’t make any sense. 

I wasn’t going on camera to talk about operations, and I wasn’t on a mission to self-promote. 

I wanted to raise one million dollars for families of the fallen, and TheToday Show was the biggest morning show on television. 

I’d served in the military for nearly twenty years by that point, without a singleinfraction on my record, and for the previous four years the Navy had used me astheir poster boy. 

They put me on billboards, I was interviewed on CNN, and I’djumped out of an airplane on NBC. 

They placed me in dozens of magazine andnewspaper stories, which helped their recruitment mission. 

Now they were trying tostifle me for no good reason. 

Hell, if anybody knew the regulations of what I couldand could not say it was me. 

In the nick of time, the Navy’s legal departmentcleared me to proceed. 

   Billboard during my recruiting daysMy interview was brief. 

I told a CliffsNotes version of my life story and mentionedI’d be on a liquid diet, drinking a carbohydrate-loaded sports drink as my onlynutrition until the record was broken. 

“What should we cook for you tomorrow once it’s all over?” Savannah Guthriereplied. 

I laughed and played along, agreeable as hell, but don’t get it twisted, I wasway out of my comfort zone. 

I was about to go to war with myself, but I didn’t looklike it or act like it. 

As the clock wound down I took my shirt off and was wearing only a pair of lightweight, black running shorts and running shoes. 

“Wow, it’s like looking at myself in a mirror,” Lauer joked, gesturing toward me. 

“This segment just got even more interesting,” said Savannah. 

“All right David,best of luck to you. 

We will be watching. 

”Someone hit play on Going the Distance, the Rocky theme song, and I stepped tothe pull-up bar. 

It was painted matte black, wrapped with white tape, and stenciledwith the phrase, SHOW NO WEAKNESS in white lettering. 

I got the last word in asI strapped on my gray gloves. 

“Please donate to specialops. 

org,” I said. 

“We’re trying to raise a million dollars. 

”“Alright, are you ready?” Lauer asked. 

“Three…two…one…David, go!”With that, the clock started and I rocked a set of eight pull-ups. 

The rules laid downby the Guinness Book of World Records were clear. 

I had to start each pull-up froma dead hang with arms fully extended, and my chin had to exceed the bar. 

“So it begins,” Savannah said. 

I smiled for the camera and looked relaxed, but even those first pull-ups didn’t feelright. 

Part of it was situational. 

I was a lone fish in a glass box aquarium thatattracted sunshine and reflected a bank of hot show lights. 

The other half wastechnical. 

From the very first pull-up I noticed that the bar had a lot more give thanI was used to. 

I didn’t have my usual power and anticipated a long fucking day. 

Atfirst, I blocked that shit out. 

Had to. 

A looser bar just meant a stronger effort andgave me another opportunity to be uncommon. 

Throughout the day people passed by on the street below, waved, and cheered. 

Iwaved back, kept to my plan, and rocked six pull-ups on the minute, every damnminute, but it wasn’t easy because of that rickety bar. 

My force was gettingdissipated, and after hundreds of pull-ups, dissipation took its toll. 

Each subsequentpull-up required a monumental effort, a stronger grip, and at the 1,500 mark myforearms hurt like hell. 

My massage therapist rubbed them down between sets, butthey bulged with lactic acid which seeped into every muscle in my upper body. 

After more than six long hours, and with 2,000 pull-ups in the bank, I took my firstten-minute break. 

I was well ahead of my twenty-four-hour pace, and the sunangled lower on the horizon, which reduced the mercury in the room tomanageable. 

It was late enough that the whole studio was shut down. 

It was just me,a few friends, a massage therapist, and my mother. 

Today Show cameras were set upand rolling to clock me and make sure I kept to regulations. 

I had more than 2,000pull-ups still to go, and for the first time that day, doubt carved out a home in mybrain. 

I didn’t vocalize my negativity, and I tried to reset my mind for the second halfpush, but the truth was my whole plan had gone to hell. 

My carbohydrate drinkwasn’t giving me the power I needed, and I didn’t have a Plan B, so I ordered anddowned a cheeseburger. 

It felt good to have some real food. 

Meanwhile, my teamtried to stabilize the bar by tying it to the pipes in the rafters, but instead of recharging my system like I’d hoped, the long break had an adverse effect. 

During first pull-up record attemptMy body was shutting down, while my mind swirled with panic because I’d made apledge and staked my name on a quest to raise money and break a record, and Ialready knew that there was no way on this earth I was gonna be able to get it done. 

It took me five hours to do another 500 pull-ups—that’s an average of under twopull-ups per minute. 

I was verging on total muscle failure after doing only 1,000more pull-ups than I would rock in three hours at the gym on a typical Saturdaywith no ill effects. 

How was that possible?I tried to bull my way through, but tension and lactic acid had overwhelmed mysystem and my upper body was a lump of dough. 

I had never hit muscle failurebefore in my life. 

I’d run on broken legs in BUD/S, run nearly a hundred miles onbroken feet, and accomplished dozens of physical feats with a hole in my heart. 

But late at night, on the second floor of the NBC tower, I pulled the plug. 

After my2,500th pull-up, I could barely lift my hands high enough to grip the bar, let aloneclear it with my chin, and just like that, it was over. 

There would be no celebratorybreakfast with Savannah and Matt. 

There would be no celebration at all. 

I failed,and I’d failed in front of millions of people. 

So did I hang my head in shame and misery? Fuck no! To me a failure is just astepping stone to future success. 

The next morning, my phone was blowing up so Ileft it in my hotel room and went for a run in Central Park. 

I needed zerodistractions and time enough to go back through what I’d done well and where I’dfallen short. 

In the military, after every real-world mission or field exercise, we fillout After Action Reports (AARs), which serve as live autopsies. 

We do them nomatter the outcome, and if you’re analyzing a failure like I was, the AAR isabsolutely crucial. 

Because when you’re headed into uncharted territory there areno books to study, no YouTube instructional videos to watch. 

All I had to read weremy mistakes, and I considered all variables. 

First of all, I should never have gone on that show. 

My motivation was solid. 

It wasa good idea to try to increase awareness and raise money for the foundation, andwhile I required exposure to raise the amount I’d hoped, by thinking of money first(always a bad idea) I wasn’t focused on the task at hand. 

To break this record, Ineeded an optimal environment, and that realization blasted me like a surpriseattack. 

I didn’t respect the record enough going in. 

I thought I could have broken iton a rusty bar bolted to the back of a pick-up truck with loose shocks, so eventhough I tested the bar twice before game day, it never bothered me enough to makea change, and my lack of focus and attention to detail cost me a shot at immortality. 

There were also way too many bubbly looky-loos buzzing in and out of the room,asking for pictures between sets. 

This was the beginning of the selfie era, and thatsickness most definitely invaded my motherfucking safe space. 

Obviously, my break was too long. 

I figured massage would counteract the swellingand lactic acid build-up, but I was wrong about that too, and I should have takenmore salt tablets to prevent cramping. 

Before my attempt, haters found me onlineand predicted my failure, but I ignored them and didn’t fully absorb the hard truthscouched in their negativity. 

I thought, as long as I trained hard, the record would bemine, and as a result, I wasn’t as well-prepared as I should have been. 

You can’t prepare for unknown factors, but if you have a better pre-game focus, youwill likely only have to deal with one or two rather than ten. 

In New York, too manybubbled up, and unknown factors usually blaze a wake of doubt. 

Afterward, I waseye to eye with my haters and acknowledged that my margin for error was small. 

Iweighed 210 pounds, much heavier than anyone else who had ever tried to breakthat record, and my probability of failure was high. 

I didn’t touch a pull-up bar for two weeks, but once back in Honolulu I hammeredsets at my home gym and noticed the difference in the bar right way. 

Still, I had toresist the temptation to blame everything on that loose bar because odds were that afirmer one wouldn’t translate into an extra 1,521 pull-ups. 

I researched gymnastchalk, gloves, and taping systems. 

I sampled and experimented. 

This time I wanteda fan set below the bar to cool me down between sets, and I switched up mynutrition. 

Instead of running off pure carbs I added in some protein and bananas toprevent cramping. 

When it came time to choose a location to attempt the record, I knew I needed to get back to who I am at my core. 

That meant losing the glitz andsetting up shop in a dungeon. 

And on a trip to Nashville, I found just the place, aCrossfit gym a mile from my mother’s house, owned by a former marine namedNandor Tamaska. 

After emailing a couple of times, I ran over to Crossfit Brentwood Hills to meethim. 

It was set in a strip mall, a few doors down from a Target, and there wasnothing fancy about the place. 

It had black mat floors, buckets of chalk, racks ofiron, and lots of hard motherfuckers doing work. 

When I walked in, the first thing Idid was grab the pull-up bar and shake it. 

It was bolted into the ground just like I’dhoped. 

Even a little sway in the bar would require me to adjust my grip mid-set, andwhen your goal is 4,021 pull-ups, all minuscule movements accumulate into areservoir of wasted energy, which takes a toll. 

“This is exactly what I need,” I said, gripping the bar. 

“Yeah,” Nandor said. 

“They have to be sturdy to double as our squat racks. 

”In addition to its strength and stability, it was the right height. 

I didn’t want a shortbar, because bending your legs can cause cramping in the hamstrings. 

I needed ithigh enough that I could grab it when standing on my toes. 

I could tell right away that Nandor was a perfect co-conspirator for this mission. 

Hehad been an enlisted man, got into Crossfit, and moved to Nashville from Atlantawith his wife and family to open his first gym. 

Not many people are willing to opentheir doors and let a stranger take over their gym, but Nandor was down with theWarrior Foundation cause. 

My second attempt was scheduled for November, and for five straight weeks I did500-1,300 pull-ups a day at my home gym in Hawaii. 

During my last island session,I did 2,000 pull-ups in five hours, then caught a flight to Nashville, arriving six daysbefore my attempt. 

Nandor rallied members of his gym to act as witnesses and my support crew. 

Hetook care of the playlist, sourced the chalk, and set up a break room in back in caseI needed it. 

He also put out a press release. 

I trained at his gym in the run-up togame day, and a local news channel came by to file a report. 

The local newspaperdid a story too. 

It was small scale, but Nashville was growing curious, especially theCrossfit junkies. 

Several showed up to absorb the scene. 

I spoke with Nandorrecently, and I liked how he put it. 

“People have been running for decades, and running long distances, but 4,000 pull-ups, the human body isn’t designed to do that. 

So to get a chance to witnesssomething like that was pretty neat. 

”I rested the full day before the attempt and when I showed up to the gym I feltstrong and prepared for the minefield ahead. 

Nandor and my mom collaborated tohave everything dialed in. 

There was a sleek digital timer on the wall which alsotracked my count, plus they had two battery-powered wall clocks running as backups. 

There was a Guinness Book of World Records banner hanging over the bar,and a video crew because every rep had to be recorded for potential review. 

Mytape was right. 

My gloves perfect. 

The bar was bolted solid, and when I started out, my performance was explosive. 

The numbers remained the same. 

I was gunning for six pull-ups every minute, onthe minute, and during the first ten sets I rose up chest high. 

Then I remembered mygame plan to minimize needless movement and wasted energy. 

On my initialattempt I felt pressure to get my chin well over the bar, but while all that extra spacemade for a good show, it did not and would not help me get the damn record. 

Thistime I told myself to barely clear the bar with my chin, and not to use my arms andhands for anything other than pull-ups. 

Instead of reaching down for my waterbottle like I had in New York, I set it on a stack of wooden boxes (the kind used forbox jumps), so all I had to do was turn and suck my nutrition through a straw. 

Thefirst sip triggered me to dial back my pull-up motion and from then on, I remaineddisciplined as I piled up numbers. 

I was on my game and confident as hell. 

I wasn’tthinking of just 4,020 pull-ups. 

I wanted to go the full twenty-four hours. 

If I didthat, 5,000 was possible, or even 6,000!I remained hyper vigilant, scanning for any physical issues that could crop up andderail the attempt. 

All was smooth until, after almost four hours and 1,300 pull-ups,my hands started to blister. 

In between sets my mom hit me with Second Skin so Icould stay on top of the cuts. 

This was a new problem for me, and I remembered allthe doubting comments I’d read on social media prior to my attempt. 

My arms weretoo long, they said. 

I weighed too much. 

My form wasn’t ideal, I put too muchpressure on my hands. 

I’d disregarded that last comment because during my firstattempt I didn’t have palm issues, but in the midst of my second I realized it wasbecause the first bar had so much give. 

This time I had more stability and power,but over time that hard-ass bar did damage. 

Still, I labored on and after 1,700 pull-ups my forearms started aching, and when Ibent my arms, my biceps pinched too. 

I remembered those sensations from my firstgo ’round. 

It was the beginning of cramps, so between sets I downed salt tablets andate two bananas, and that took care of my muscular discomfort. 

My palms just keptgetting worse. 

A hundred and fifty pull-ups later I could feel them splitting down the middlebeneath my gloves. 

I knew I should stop and try to fix the problem, but I also knewthat might trigger my body to stiffen up and shut down. 

I was fighting two fires atonce and didn’t know where to strike first. 

I opted to stay on the minute by minutepace, and in between experimented with different solutions. 

I wore two pairs ofgloves, then three. 

I resorted to my old friend, duct tape. 

Didn’t help. 

I couldn’twrap the bar in pads because that was against Guinness rules. 

All I could do was tryanything and everything to stay in the fight. 

Ten hours into the attempt, I hit a wall. 

I was down to three pull-ups a minute on theminute. 

The pain was excruciating and I needed some relief. 

I took my right gloveoff. 

Layers of skin came off with it. 

My palm looked like raw hamburger. 

My momcalled a doctor friend, Regina, who lived nearby and the two of us went into theback room to wait for her and try to salvage my record attempt. 

When Reginashowed up she evaluated the situation, pulled out a syringe, loaded it with localanesthetic and dipped the needle toward the open wound on my right hand. 

      My hand during the second pull-up record attemptShe looked over. 

My heart pounded, sweat saturated every inch of my skin. 

I couldfeel my muscles cooling down and stiffening up, but I nodded, turned away, and shesunk that needle in deep. 

It hurt so fucking bad, but I held my primal scream inside. 

Show no weakness remained my motto, but that didn’t mean I felt strong. 

My mompulled off my left glove, anticipating the second shot, but Regina was busyexamining the swelling in my biceps and the bulging spasms in my forearms. 

“You look like you’re in rhabdomyolysis, David,” she said. 

“You shouldn’tcontinue. 

It’s dangerous. 

” I had no idea what the fuck she was talking about, so shebroke it down. 

There’s a phenomenon that happens when one muscle group is worked way toohard for way too long. 

The muscles become starved of glucose and break down,leaking myoglobin, a fibrous protein that stores oxygen in the muscle, into thebloodstream. 

When that happens, it’s up to the kidneys to filter all those proteinsout and if they become overwhelmed, they shut down. 

“People can die fromrhabdo,” she said. 

My hands throbbed with agony. 

My muscles were locking up, and the stakescouldn’t be higher. 

Any rational person would have thrown in the towel, but I couldhear Going the Distance booming from the speakers, and knew that this was my14th round, Cut me, Mick, moment. 

Fuck rationality. 

I held up my left palm and had Regina sink her needle in. 

Waves ofpain washed through me as a bumper crop of doubt flowered in my mind. 

Shewrapped both palms in layers of gauze and medical tape and fitted me with a freshpair of gloves. 

Then I stalked back out onto the gym floor and got back to work. 

Iwas at 2,900, and as long as I remained in the fight, I still believed anything waspossible. 

I did sets of twos and threes on the minute for two hours, but it felt like I wasgripping a red hot, melting rod, which meant I was down to using my fingertips togrip the bar. 

First I used four fingers, then three. 

I was able to gut out one hundredmore pull-ups, then one hundred more. 

Hours ticked by. 

I crept closer but with mybody in rhabdo, breakdown was imminent. 

I did several sets of pull-ups with mywrists dangling over the bar. 

It sounds impossible, but I managed until the numbingagents stopped working. 

Then even bending my fingers felt like I was stabbing myself in the hand with a sharp knife. 

After eclipsing 3,200 pull-ups, I worked out the math and realized if I could do 800sets of one, it would take thirteen hours and change to break the record and I wouldjust beat the clock. 

I lasted forty-five minutes. 

The pain was too much and the vibein the room went from optimistic to somber. 

I was still trying to show as littleweakness as I could, but the volunteers could see me messing with my gloves andgrip, and knew something was drastically wrong. 

When I went into the back toregroup a second time I heard a collective sigh that sounded like doom. 

Regina and my mother unwrapped the tape on my hands, and I could feel my fleshpeeling like a banana. 

Both palms were filleted open down to the dermis, which iswhere our nerves lie. 

Achilles had his heel, and when it came to pull-ups, my gift,and my undoing, were my hands. 

The doubters were right. 

I wasn’t one of thoselightweight, graceful pull-up guys. 

I was powerful, and the power came from mygrip. 

But now my hand better resembled a physiology mannequin than somethinghuman. 

Emotionally, I was wasted. 

Not just because of my sheer physical exhaustion orbecause I couldn’t get the record for myself, but because so many people had comeout to help. 

I’d taken over Nandor’s gym and felt like I’d disappointed everyone. 

Without a word, my mother and I slipped out the back door like we were escaping acrime scene, and as she drove to the hospital, I couldn’t stop thinking, I’m betterthan this!While Nandor and his team broke down the clocks, untied the banners, swept upchalk, and peeled bloody tape off their pull-up bar, my mom and I slumped intochairs in the ER waiting room. 

I was holding what was left of my glove. 

It lookedlike it was lifted from the OJ Simpson crime scene, like it had been marinated inblood. 

She eyeballed me and shook her head. 

“Well,” she said, “I know one thing…”After a long pause I turned to face her. 

“What’s that?”“You’re gonna do this again. 

”She read my damn mind. 

I was already doing my live autopsy and would runthrough a complete AAR on paper as soon as my bloody hands would allow. 

I knewthere was treasure in this wreckage and leverage to be gained somewhere. 

I just hadto piece it together like a puzzle. 

And the fact that she realized that without mysaying so fired me up. 

A lot of us surround ourselves with people who speak to our desire for comfort. 

Who would rather treat the pain of our wounds and prevent further injury than helpus callous over them and try again. 

We need to surround ourselves with people whowill tell us what we need to hear, not what we want to hear, but at the same time notmake us feel we’re up against the impossible. 

My mother was my biggest fan. 

Whenever I failed in life she was always asking me when and where I would goafter it again. 

She never said, Well, maybe it isn’t meant to be. 

 Most wars are won or lost in our own heads, and when we’re in a foxhole weusually aren’t alone, and we need to be confident in the quality of the heart, mind,and dialogue of the person hunkered down with us. 

Because at some point we willneed some empowering words to keep us focused and deadly. 

In that hospital, in myown personal foxhole, I was swimming in doubt. 

I fell 800 pull-ups short and Iknew what 800 pull-ups felt like. 

That’s a long fucking day! But there was nobodyelse I’d rather have been in that foxhole with. 

“Don’t worry,” she said. 

“I’ll start calling those witnesses up as soon as we gethome. 

”“Roger that,” I said. 

“Tell them I’ll be back on that bar in two months. 

” ***In life, there is no gift as overlooked or inevitable as failure. 

I’ve had quite a fewand have learned to relish them, because if you do the forensics you’ll find cluesabout where to make adjustments and how to eventually accomplish your task. 

I’mnot talking about a mental list either. 

After the second attempt, I wrote everythingout long-hand, but didn’t start with the obvious issue, my grip. 

Initially, Ibrainstormed everything that went well, because in every failure a lot of goodthings will have happened, and we must acknowledge them. 

The best takeaway from the Nashville attempt was Nandor’s place. 

His dungeon ofa gym was the perfect environment for me. 

Yeah, I’m on social media, and in thespotlight from time to time, but I am not a Hollywood person. 

I get my strengthfrom a very dark place, and Nandor’s gym wasn’t a phony-ass, happy factory. 

It wasdark, sweaty, painful, and real. 

I called him the very next day and asked if I couldcome back to train and make another run at the record. 

I’d taken a lot of his timeand energy and left behind a mess, so I had no idea how he’d respond. 

“Yeah, motherfucker,” he said. 

“Let’s go!” It meant a lot to have his support again. 

Another positive was how I handled my second meltdown. 

I was off the mat and onthe comeback trail before I even saw the ER doc. 

That’s where you want to be. 

Youcan’t let a simple failure derail your mission, or let it worm so far up your ass ittakes over your brain and sabotages your relationships with people who are close toyou. 

Everyone fails sometimes and life isn’t supposed to be fair, much less bend toyour every whim. 

Luck is a capricious bitch. 

It won’t always go your way, so you can’t get trapped inthis idea that just because you’ve imagined a possibility for yourself that yousomehow deserve it. 

Your entitled mind is dead weight. 

Cut it loose. 

Don’t focus onwhat you think you deserve. 

Take aim on what you are willing to earn! I neverblamed anyone for my failures, and I didn’t hang my head in Nashville. 

I stayedhumble and sidestepped my entitled mind because I knew damn well I hadn’tearned my record. 

The scoreboard does not lie, and I didn’t delude myselfotherwise. 

Believe it or not, most people prefer delusion. 

They blame others or badluck or chaotic circumstance. 

I didn’t, which was positive. 

I listed most of the equipment we used on the positive side of the AAR, as well. 

Thetape and chalk worked, and even though the bar tore me the fuck up, it also got me 700 additional pull-ups, so I was headed in the right direction. 

Another positive wasthe support of Nandor’s Crossfit community. 

It felt great to be surrounded by suchintense, respectful people, but this time I’d need to cut the number of volunteers inhalf. 

I wanted as little buzz in that room as possible. 

After listing out all the plusses, it was time to kick the tires on my mindset, and ifyou’re doing your post-faceplant due diligence, you should do that too. 

That meanschecking yourself on how and what you were thinking during the preparation andexecution phases of your failure. 

My commitment to preparation and determinationin the fight are always there. 

They didn’t waver, but my belief was shakier than Icared to admit, and as I prepared for my third go ’round it was imperative to movebeyond doubt. 

That wasn’t easy because after my second failure in as many attempts, the doubterswere everywhere online. 

The record holder, Stephen Hyland, was light and spiderystrong with thick, muscular palms. 

He was the perfect build for the pull-up record,and everyone was telling me I was just too big, my form was too brutal, and that Ishould stop trying to go for it before I hurt myself even worse. 

They pointed to thescoreboard that doesn’t lie. 

I was still over 800 pull-ups away from the record. 

That’s more than I gained between my first and second attempts. 

From thebeginning some of them had predicted my hands would give out, and when thattruth revealed itself in Nashville it presented a big mental hurdle. 

Part of mewondered if those motherfuckers were right. 

If I was trying to achieve theimpossible. 

Then I thought of an English middle-distance runner from back in the day namedRoger Bannister. 

When Bannister was trying to break the four-minute mile in the1950s, experts told him it couldn’t be done, but that didn’t stop him. 

He failed againand again, but he persevered, and when he ran his historic mile in 3:59. 

4 on May 6,1954, he didn’t just break a record, he broke open the floodgates simply by provingit possible. 

Six weeks later, his record was eclipsed, and by now over 1,000 runnershave done what was once thought to be beyond human capability. 

We are all guilty of allowing so-called experts, or just people who have moreexperience in a given field than we do, to cap our potential. 

One of the reasons welove sports is because we also love watching those glass ceilings get shattered. 

If Iwas going to be the next athlete to smash popular perception, I’d need to stoplistening to doubt, whether it streamed in from the outside or bubbled up fromwithin, and the best way to do that was to decide that the pull-up record was alreadymine. 

I didn’t know when it would officially become mine. 

It might be in twomonths or twenty years, but once I decided it belonged to me and decoupled it fromthe calendar, I was filled with confidence and relieved of any and all pressurebecause my task morphed from trying to achieve the impossible into workingtoward an inevitability. 

But to get there, I’d have to find the tactical advantage I’dbeen missing. 

A tactical review is the final and most vital piece of any live autopsy or AAR. 

Andwhile I had improved tactically from the first attempt—working on a more stablebar and minimizing wasted energy—I still fell 800 reps short, so we needed to delvedeeper into the numbers. 

Six pull-ups per minute on the minute had failed me twice. 

Yes, it placed me on a fast track to 4,020, but I never got there. 

This time, I decidedto start slower to go further. 

I also knew from experience that I would hit some sort of wall after ten hours and that my response couldn’t be a longer break. 

The ten-hour mark smacked me in my face twice and both times I stopped for five minutesor longer, which led to ultimate failure pretty quickly. 

I needed to stay true to mystrategy and limit any long breaks to four minutes max. 

Now, about that pull-up bar. 

Yeah, it would probably tear me up again, so I neededto find a workaround. 

According to the rules, I wouldn’t be allowed to switch up thedistance between my hands mid-attempt. 

The width would have to remain the samefrom the first pull-up. 

The only thing I could change would be how I was going toprotect my hands. 

In the run-up to my third attempt, I experimented with alldifferent types of gloves. 

I also got clearance to use custom foam pads to protect mypalms. 

I remembered seeing a couple SEAL buddies use slices of foam mattressesto protect their hands when they were lifting heavy weights, and called on amattress company to custom design form-fitting pads for my hands. 

Guinnessapproved the equipment, and at 10 a. 

m. 

on January 19, 2013, two months afterfailing for the second time, I was back on the bar at Crossfit Brentwood Hills. 

I started slow and easy with five pull-ups on the minute. 

I didn’t strap my foampads with tape. 

I just held them in place around the bar, and they seemed to workwell. 

Within an hour the foam had formed around my hands, insulating them frommolten-iron hell. 

Or so I fucking hoped. 

At around the two-hour, 600 rep mark, Iasked Nandor to play Going the Distance on a loop. 

I felt something click insideand went full cyborg. 

I found a rhythm on the bar and between sets I sat on a weight bench and stared atthe chalk-dusted floor. 

My point of view narrowed into tunnel vision as I preparedmy mind for the hell that was to come. 

When the first blister opened on my palm Iknew shit was about to get real. 

But this time, thanks to my failures and forensics, Iwas ready. 

That doesn’t mean I was having any fun. 

I wasn’t. 

I was over it. 

I didn’t want to dopull-ups anymore, but achieving goals or overcoming obstacles doesn’t have to befun. 

Seeds burst from the inside out in a self-destructive ritual of new life. 

Does thatsound like fucking fun? Like it feels good? I wasn’t in that gym to get happy or dowhat I wanted to be doing. 

I was there to turn myself inside out if that’s what it tookto blast through any and all mental, emotional, and physical barriers. 

After twelve hours, I finally hit 3,000 pull-ups, a major checkpoint for me, and feltlike I’d run headfirst into a wall. 

I was exasperated, in agony, and my hands werestarting to come apart again. 

I was still a long way from the record, and I felt all theeyeballs in the room upon me. 

With them came the crushing weight of failure andhumiliation. 

Suddenly, I was back in the cage during my third Hell Week, taping myshins and ankles before mustering up with a new BUD/S class who’d heard it wasmy last chance. 

It takes great strength to be vulnerable enough to put your ass on the line, in public,and work toward a dream that feels like it’s slipping away. 

We all have eyeballs onus. 

Our family and friends are watching, and even if you’re surrounded by positivepeople, they will have ideas about who you are, what you’re good at, and how youshould focus your energy. 

That shit is just human nature, and if you try to break outof their box you’ll get some unsolicited advice that has a way of smothering youraspirations if you let it. 

Often our people don’t mean any harm. 

Nobody who cares about us actually wants us to get hurt. 

They want us to be safe, comfortable, andhappy, and not to have to stare at the floor in a dungeon sifting through shards ofour broken dreams. 

Too bad. 

There’s a lot of potential in those moments of pain. 

And if you figure out how to piece that picture back together, you’ll find a hell of alot of power there too!I kept my break to just four minutes, as planned. 

Long enough to stuff my hands,and those foam pads, into a pair of padded gloves. 

But when I got back on the bar Ifelt slow and weak. 

Nandor, his wife, and the other volunteers saw my struggle, butthey left me the fuck alone to put in my ear buds, channel Rocky Balboa, and keepgrinding one rep at a time. 

I went from four pull-ups on the minute to three, andfound my cyborg trance again. 

I went ugly, I got dark. 

I imagined my pain was thecreation of a mad scientist named Stephen Hyland, the evil genius who was intemporary possession of my record and my soul. 

It was him! That motherfuckerwas torturing me from across the globe, and it was up to me and only me to keeppiling up numbers and steamroll toward him, if I wanted to take his motherfuckingsoul!To be clear, I wasn’t angry with Hyland—I don’t even know him! I went there tofind the edge I needed to keep going. 

I got personal with him in my head, not out ofoverconfidence or envy, but to drown out my own doubt. 

Life is a head game. 

Thiswas just the latest angle I used to win a game within that game. 

I had to find anedge somewhere, and if you find it in the person standing in your way, that’s potent. 

As the hours ticked past midnight I started closing the distance between us, but thepull-ups weren’t coming fast and they weren’t coming easy. 

I was tired mentallyand physically, deep into rhabdo, and I was down to three pull-ups a minute. 

When Ihit 3,800 pull-ups I felt like I could see the mountain top. 

I also knew it waspossible to go from being able to do three pull-ups to no pull-ups in a flash. 

Thereare stories of people at Badwater who reached mile 129 and couldn’t finish a 135-mile race! You never know when you’ll reach your 100 percent and hit the point oftotal muscle fatigue. 

I kept waiting for that moment to come, when I couldn’t pickmy arms up anymore. 

Doubt stalked me like a shadow. 

I tried my best to control itor silence it, yet it kept reappearing, following me, pushing me. 

After seventeen hours of pain, around 3 a. 

m. 

on January 20, 2013, I did my 4,020thand 4,021st pull-up, and the record was mine. 

Everyone in the gym cheered, but Istayed composed. 

After two more sets and 4,030 total pull-ups, I took myheadphones out, stared into the camera and said, “I tracked you down, StephenHyland!”In one day, I’d lifted the equivalent of 846,030 pounds, nearly three times theweight of the Space Shuttle! Cheers spread to laughter as I pulled off my gloves anddisappeared into the back room, but much to everyone’s surprise, I was not in themood to celebrate. 

Does that shock you too? You know that my refrigerator is never full, and it neverwill be because I live a mission-driven life, always on the hunt for the nextchallenge. 

That mindset is the reason I broke that record, finished Badwater,became a SEAL, rocked Ranger School, and on down the list. 

In my mind I’m thatracehorse always chasing a carrot I’ll never catch, forever trying to prove myself tomyself. 

And when you live that way and attain a goal, success feels anti-climactic. 

 Unlike my initial shot at the record, my success barely made a ripple in the newscycle. 

Which was just fine. 

I wasn’t doing it for adulation. 

I raised some money, andI learned all I could from that pull-up bar. 

After logging more than 67,000 pull-upsin nine months, it was time to put them in my Cookie Jar and move on. 

Because lifeis one long motherfucking imaginary game that has no scoreboard, no referee, andisn’t over until we’re dead and buried. 

And all I’d ever wanted from it was to become successful in my own eyes. 

Thatdidn’t mean wealth or celebrity, a garage full of hot cars, or a harem of beautifulwomen trailing after me. 

It meant becoming the hardest motherfucker who everlived. 

Sure, I stacked up some failures along the way, but in my mind the recordproved that I was close. 

Only the game wasn’t over, and being hard came with therequirement to drain every drop of ability from my mind, body, and soul before thewhistle blew. 

I would remain in constant pursuit. 

I wouldn’t leave anything on the table. 

I wantedto earn my final resting place. 

That’s how I thought back then, anyway. 

Because Ihad no clue how close to the end I already was. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com  CHALLENGE #10Think about your most recent and your most heart-wrenching failures. 

Break outthat journal one last time. 

Log off the digital version and write them out long-hand. 

I want you to feel this process because you are about to file your own, belated AfterAction Reports. 

First off, write out all the good things, everything that went well, from your failures. 

Be detailed and generous with yourself. 

A lot of good things will have happened. 

It’s rarely all bad. 

Then note how you handled your failure. 

Did it affect your lifeand your relationships? How so?How did you think throughout the preparation for and during the execution stage ofyour failure? You have to know how you were thinking at each step because it’s allabout mindset, and that’s where most people fall short. 

Now go back through and make a list of things you can fix. 

This isn’t time to besoft or generous. 

Be brutally honest, write them all out. 

Study them. 

Then look atyour calendar and schedule another attempt as soon as possible. 

If the failurehappened in childhood, and you can’t recreate the Little League all-star game youchoked in, I still want you to write that report because you’ll likely be able to usethat information to achieve any goal going forward. 

As you prepare, keep that AAR handy, consult your Accountability Mirror, andmake all necessary adjustments. 

When it comes time to execute, keep everythingwe’ve learned about the power of a calloused mind, the Cookie Jar, and The 40%Rule in the forefront of your mind. 

Control your mindset. 

Dominate your thoughtprocess. 

This life is all a fucking mind game. 

Realize that. 

Own it!And if you fail again, so the fuck be it. 

Take the pain. 

Repeat these steps and keepfighting. 

That’s what it’s all about. 

Share your stories from preparation, training,and  execution on social media  with the hashtags #canthurtme#empowermentoffailure. 

  OceanofPDF. 

com  CHAPTER ELEVEN   11. 

WHAT IF?Before the race even kicked off I knew I was fucked. 

In 2014, the National ParkService wouldn’t approve the traditional Badwater course, so Chris Kostmanredrew the map. 

Instead of starting in Death Valley National Park and running forty-two miles through the hottest desert on the planet, it would launch further upcountryat the base of a twenty-two-mile climb. 

That wasn’t my problem. 

It was the fact thatI toed the line eleven pounds over my usual race weight, and had gained ten ofthose pounds in the previous seven days. 

I wasn’t a fat ass. 

To the average eye Ilooked fit, but Badwater wasn’t an average race. 

To run and finish strong, mycondition needed to be tip top, and I was far from it. 

Whatever was happening to mecame as a shock, because after two years of substandard running, I thought I’dgotten my powers back. 

The previous January I’d won a one-hundred-kilometer glacial trail race calledFrozen Otter. 

It wasn’t as hard as the Hurt 100 but it was close. 

Set in Wisconsin,just outside Milwaukee, the course laid out like a lopsided figure eight, with thestart-finish at the center. 

We passed it between the two loops, which enabled us tostock up on food and other necessary supplies from our cars, and stuff them into ourpacks with our emergency supplies. 

The weather can turn evil out there, and raceorganizers compiled a list of necessities we were required to have on us at all timesso we wouldn’t die of dehydration, hypothermia, or exposure. 

The first lap was the larger loop of the two and when we set off the temperature wassitting at zero degrees Fahrenheit. 

Those trails were never plowed. 

In some places,snow piled into drifts. 

In others the trails seemed purposefully glazed with slick ice. 

Which presented a problem because I wasn’t wearing boots or trail shoes like mostof my competitors. 

I laced up my standard running shoes, and tucked them intosome cheap ass crampons, which theoretically were supposed to grip the ice andkeep me upright. 

Well, the ice won that war and my crampons snapped off in thefirst hour. 

Nevertheless, I was leading the race and breaking trail in an average ofsix to twelve inches of snow. 

In some places the drifts were piled much higher. 

Myfeet were cold and wet from the starting gun, and within two hours they felt frozenthrough, especially my toes. 

My top half wasn’t faring much better. 

When yousweat in below-freezing temperature, salt on your body chafes the skin. 

Myunderarms and chest were cracking raspberry red. 

I was covered in rashes, my toeshurt with every step, but none of that registered too high on my pain scale, becauseI was running free. 

For the first time since my second heart surgery, my body was beginning to putitself back together. 

I was getting 100 percent of my oxygen supply like everyoneelse, my endurance and strength were next-level, and though the trail was a slippery mess, my technique was dialed-in too. 

I was way out front and stopped at my carfor a sandwich before the last twenty-two-mile loop. 

My toes throbbed with evilpain. 

I suspected they were frostbitten, which meant I was in danger of losing someof them, but I didn’t want to take off my shoes and look. 

Once again, doubt and fearwere popping in my brain, reminding me that only a handful of people had everfinished the Frozen Otter, and that no lead was safe in that kind of cold. 

Weather,more than any other variable, can break a motherfucker down quick. 

But I didn’tlisten to any of that. 

I created a new dialogue and told myself to finish the racestrong and worry about amputated toes at the hospital after I was crownedchampion. 

I ran back onto the course. 

A blast of sun had melted some of the snow earlier in theday, but the cold wind iced up the trail nicely. 

As I ran, I flashed to my first year atHurt 100 and the great Karl Meltzer. 

Back then, I was a plodder. 

I hit the turf withmy heel first, and peeling the muddy trail with the entire surface area of my footincreased my odds of slipping and falling. 

Karl didn’t run like that. 

He moved like agoat, bouncing on his toes and running along the edges of the trail. 

As soon as histoes hit the ground he fired his legs into the air. 

That’s why he looked like he wasfloating. 

By design, he barely touched the ground, while his head and core remainedstable and engaged. 

From that moment onward, his movements were permanentlyetched in my brain like a cave painting. 

I visualized them all the time and put histechniques into practice during training runs. 

They say it takes sixty-six days to build a habit. 

For me it takes a hell of a lot longerthan that, but I eventually get there, and during all those years of ultra training andcompetition I was working on my craft. 

A true runner analyzes their form. 

Wedidn’t learn how to do that in the SEALs, but being around so many ultra runnersfor years, I was able to absorb and practice skills that seemed unnatural at first. 

AtFrozen Otter, my main focus was to hit the ground soft; to touch it just enough toexplode. 

During my third BUD/S class and then my first platoon, when I wasconsidered one of the better runners, my head bounced all over the place. 

Myweight wasn’t balanced and when my foot hit the ground all my weight would besupported by that one leg, which led to some awkward falls on slippery terrain. 

Through trial and error, and thousands of hours of training, I learned to maintainbalance. 

At Frozen Otter it all came together. 

With speed and grace, I navigated steep,slippery trails. 

I kept my head flat and still, my motion quiet as possible, and mysteps silent by running on the front of my feet. 

When I picked up speed, it was as ifI’d disappeared into a white wind, elevated into a meditative state. 

I became KarlMeltzer. 

Now it was me who looked to be levitating over an impossible trail, and Ifinished the race in sixteen hours, smashing the course record and winning theFrozen Otter title without losing any toes. 

     Toes after Frozen OtterTwo years earlier I was stricken with dizzy spells during easy six-mile runs. 

In2013, I was forced to walk over one-hundred miles of Badwater, and finished inseventeenth place. 

I’d been on a downslide and thought my days of contention fortitles were long past over. 

After Frozen Otter, I was tempted to believe I’d made itall the way back and then some, and that my best ultra years were actually ahead of me. 

I took that energy into my preparations for Badwater 2014. 

I was living in Chicago at the time, working as an instructor in BUD/S prep, aschool that prepared candidates to deal with the harsh reality they would face inBUD/S. 

After more than twenty years, I was in my final year of military service,and by being placed in a position to drop wisdom on the would-bes and wanna-bes,it felt like I’d come full circle. 

As usual I would run ten miles to work and back, andsqueeze in another eight miles during lunch when I could. 

On the weekends I’d doat least one thirty-five- to forty-mile run. 

It all added up to a succession of 130-mileweeks and I was feeling strong. 

As spring bloomed I added a heat trainingcomponent by slipping on four or five layers of sweats, a beanie, and a Gore-Texjacket before hitting the streets. 

When I’d show up at work, my fellow SEALinstructors would watch, amazed, as I peeled off my wet clothes and stuffed theminto black trash bags that together weighed nearly fifteen pounds. 

I started my taper four weeks out, and went from 130-mile weeks to an eighty-mileweek, then down to sixty, forty, and twenty. 

Tapering is supposed to generate anabundance of energy as you eat and rest, enabling the body to repair all the damagedone and get you primed for competition. 

Instead, I’d never felt worse. 

I wasn’thungry and couldn’t sleep at all. 

Some people said my body was starved of calories. 

Others suggested I might be low on sodium. 

My doctor measured my thyroid and itwas a little off, but the readings weren’t so bad to explain how shitty I felt. 

Perhapsthe explanation was simple. 

That I was over-trained. 

Two weeks before the race I considered pulling out. 

I worried it was my heart againbecause on easy runs I felt a surge of adrenaline that I couldn’t vent. 

Even a mellowpace sent my pulse racing into arrhythmia. 

Ten days before the race, I landed inVegas. 

I’d scheduled five runs but couldn’t get past the three-mile mark on any ofthem. 

I wasn’t eating that much but the weight kept piling on. 

It was all water. 

Isought out another doctor who confirmed there was nothing physically wrong withme and when I heard that, I was not about to be a pussy. 

During the opening miles and initial climb of Badwater 2014, my heart rate ranhigh, but part of that was the altitude, and twenty-two miles later I made it to the topin sixth or seventh place. 

Surprised and proud, I thought, let’s see if I can godownhill. 

I’ve never enjoyed the brutality of running down a steep incline becauseit shreds the quads, but I also thought it would allow me to reset and calm mybreath. 

My body refused. 

I couldn’t catch my breath at all. 

I hit the flat section atthe bottom, slowed my pace, and began to walk. 

My competitors passed me by asmy thighs twitched uncontrollably. 

My muscle spasms were so bad, my quadslooked like there was an alien rattling around inside them. 

And I still didn’t stop! I walked for four full miles before seeking shelter in a LonePine motel room where the Badwater medical team had set up shop. 

They checkedme out and saw that my blood pressure was a bit low but easily corrected. 

Theycouldn’t find a single metric that could explain how fucked I felt. 

I ate some solid food, rested and decided to try one more time. 

There was a flatsection leaving Lone Pine and I thought if I could knock that out perhaps I’d catch asecond wind, but six or seven miles later my sails were still empty, and I’d given allI had. 

My muscles trembled and twitched, my heart jumped up and down the chart. 

I looked over at my pacer and said, “That’s it, man. 

I’m done. 

” My support vehicle pulled up behind us and I climbed inside. 

A few minutes later Iwas laying on that same motel bed, with my tail between my legs. 

I’d lasted justfifty miles, but any humiliation that came with quitting—not something I was usedto—was drowned out by an instinct that something was way the fuck off. 

It wasn’tmy fear talking or my desire for comfort. 

This time, I was certain that if I didn’tstop trying to break through this barrier, I wouldn’t make it out of the Sierras alive. 

We left Lone Pine for Las Vegas the next night, and for two days I did my best torest and recover, hoping my body would settle somewhere close to equilibrium. 

Wewere staying at the Wynn, and on that third morning I went for a jog to see if I hadanything in the tank. 

One mile later, my heart was in my throat, and I shut it down. 

Iwalked back to the hotel, knowing that despite what the doctors said, I was sick andsuspected that whatever I had was serious. 

Later that night, after seeing a movie in the Vegas suburbs, I felt weak as we strolledto a nearby restaurant, the Elephant Bar. 

My mom was a few paces ahead and I sawher in triplicate. 

I clenched my eyes shut, released them, and there were still three ofher. 

She held the door open for me and when I stepped into the cool confines, I felta bit better. 

We slid into a booth opposite one another. 

I was too unsteady to read themenu and asked her to order for me. 

From there, it got worse, and when the runnershowed up with our food, my vision blurred again. 

I strained to open my eyes wideand felt woozy as my mother looked to be floating above the table. 

“You’re going to have to call an ambulance,” I said, “because I’m going down. 

”Desperate for some stability, I laid my head on the table, but my mom didn’t dial911. 

She crossed to my side and I leaned on her as we made our way to the hostessstand and then back to the car. 

On the way I shared as much of my medical historyas I could recall, in short bursts, in case I lost consciousness and she did have to callfor help. 

Luckily, my vision and energy improved enough for her to drive me to theemergency room herself. 

My thyroid had been flagged in the past, so that’s the first thing the doctorsexplored. 

Many Navy SEALs have thyroid issues when they reach their thirties,because when you put motherfuckers in extreme environments like Hell Week andwar, their hormone levels go haywire. 

When the thyroid gland is suboptimal,fatigue, muscle aches, and weakness are among more than a dozen major sideeffects, but my thyroid levels were close to normal. 

My heart checked out too. 

TheER docs in Vegas told me all I needed was rest. 

I went back to Chicago and saw my own doctor who ordered a battery of bloodtests. 

His office tested my endocrine system and screened me for Lyme, hepatitis,Rheumatoid arthritis, and a handful of other autoimmune diseases. 

Everything cameback clean except for my thyroid which was slightly suboptimal, but that didn’texplain how I’d morphed so fast from an elite athlete capable of running hundredsof miles into a pretender who could barely muster the energy to tie his shoes, letalone run a mile without verging on collapse. 

I was in medical no-man’s-land. 

I lefthis office with more questions than answers and a prescription for thyroidmedication. 

Each day that went by I felt worse. 

Everything was crashing on me. 

I had troublegetting out of bed, I was constipated and achy. 

They took more blood and decided I had Addison’s disease, an autoimmune illness that occurs when your adrenals aredrained and your body doesn’t produce enough cortisol, which was common inSEALs because we’re primed to run on adrenaline. 

My doctor prescribed the steroidHydrocortisone, DHEA, and Arimidex among other meds, but taking his pills onlyaccelerated my decline, and after that, he and the other doctors I saw were tappedout. 

The look in their eyes said it all. 

In their minds, I was either a crazyhypochondriac, or I was dying and they didn’t know what was killing me or how toheal me. 

I fought through it the best I could. 

My coworkers didn’t know anything about mydecline because I continued to show no weakness. 

My whole life I’d been hiding allmy insecurities and trauma. 

I kept all my vulnerabilities locked down beneath aniron veneer, but eventually the pain became so bad I couldn’t even get out of bed. 

Icalled in sick and lay there, staring at the ceiling, and wondered, could this be theend?Peering into the abyss sent my mind reeling back through the days, weeks, years,like fingers flipping through old files. 

I found all the best parts and tacked themtogether into a highlight loop streamed on repeat. 

I grew up beat down and abused,filtered uneducated through a system that rejected me at every turn, until I tookownership and started to change. 

Since then I’d been obese. 

I was married anddivorced. 

I had two heart surgeries, taught myself to swim, and learned to run onbroken legs. 

I was terrified of heights, then took up high altitude sky diving. 

Waterscared the living shit out of me, yet I became a technical diver and underwaternavigator, which is several degrees of difficulty beyond scuba diving. 

I competed inmore than sixty ultra distance races, winning several, and set a pull-up record. 

Istuttered through my early years in primary school and grew up to become the NavySEALs’ most trusted public speaker. 

I’d served my country on the battlefield. 

Alongthe way I became driven to make sure that I could not be defined by the abuse I wasborn into or the bullying that I grew up with. 

I wouldn’t be defined by talent either,I didn’t have much, or my own fears and weaknesses. 

I was the sum total of the obstacles I’d overcome. 

And even though I’d told mystory to students all over the country, I never stopped long enough to appreciate thetale I told or the life I’d built. 

In my mind, I didn’t have the time to waste. 

I neverhit snooze on my life clock because there was always something else to do. 

If Iworked a twenty-hour day, I’d work out for an hour and sleep for three, but I madesure to get that motherfucker in. 

My brain wasn’t wired to appreciate, it wasprogrammed to do work, scan the horizon, ask what’s next, and get it done. 

That’swhy I piled up so many rare feats. 

I was always on the hunt for the next big thing,but as I lay there in bed, my body taut with tension and throbbing with pain, I had aclear idea what was next for me. 

The cemetery. 

After years of abuse, I’d finallyshredded my physical body beyond repair. 

I was dying. 

For weeks and months, I searched for a cure to my medical mystery, but in thatmoment of catharsis I didn’t feel sad and I didn’t feel cheated. 

I was only thirty-eight years old, but I’d lived ten lives and experienced a hell of a lot more than mosteighty-year-olds. 

I wasn’t feeling sorry for myself. 

It made sense that at some pointthe toll would come due. 

I spent hours reflecting back on my journey. 

This time, Iwasn’t sifting through the Cookie Jar while in the heat of battle hoping to find a ticket to victory. 

I wasn’t leveraging my life assets toward some new end. 

No, I wasdone fighting, and all I felt was gratitude. 

I wasn’t meant to be this person! I had to fight myself at every turn, and mydestroyed body was my biggest trophy. 

In that moment I knew it didn’t matter if Iever ran again, if I couldn’t operate anymore, or if I lived or died, and with thatacceptance came deep appreciation. 

My eyes welled with tears. 

Not because I was afraid, but because at my lowest pointI found clarity. 

The kid I always judged so harshly didn’t lie and cheat to hurtanyone’s feelings. 

He did it for acceptance. 

He broke the rules because he didn’thave the tools to compete and was ashamed for being dumb. 

He did it because heneeded friends. 

I was afraid to tell the teachers I couldn’t read. 

I was terrified of thestigma associated with special education, and instead of coming down on that kidfor one more second, instead of chastising my younger self, I understood him forthe first time. 

It was a lonely journey from there to here. 

I missed out on so much. 

I didn’t have alot of fun. 

Happiness wasn’t my cocktail of choice. 

My brain had me on constantblast. 

I lived in fear and doubt, terrified of being a nobody and contributing nothing. 

I’d judged myself constantly and I’d judged everyone else around me, too. 

Rage is a powerful thing. 

For years I’d raged at the world, channeled all my painfrom my past and used it as fuel to propel me into the motherfucking stratosphere,but I couldn’t always control the blast radius. 

Sometimes my rage scorched peoplewho weren’t as strong as I’d become, or didn’t work as hard, and I didn’t swallowmy tongue or hide my judgment. 

I let them know, and that hurt some of the peoplearound me, and it allowed people who didn’t like me to affect my military career. 

But lying in bed on that Chicago morning in the fall of 2014, I let all that judgmentgo. 

I released myself and everyone I ever knew from any and all guilt and bitterness. 

The long list of haters, doubters, racists, and abusers that populated my past, I justcouldn’t hate them anymore. 

I appreciated them because they helped create me. 

Andas that feeling stretched out, my mind quieted down. 

I’d been fighting a war forthirty-eight years, and now, at what looked and felt like the very end, I found peace. 

In this life there are countless trails to self-realization, though most demand intensediscipline, so very few take them. 

In southern Africa, the San people dance forthirty hours straight as a way to commune with the divine. 

In Tibet, pilgrims rise,kneel, then stretch out face down on the ground before rising again, in a ritual ofprostration for weeks and months, as they cover thousands of miles before arrivingat a sacred temple and folding into deep meditation. 

In Japan there’s a sect of Zenmonks that run 1,000 marathons in 1,000 days in a quest to find enlightenmentthrough pain and suffering. 

I don’t know if you could call what I felt on that bed“enlightenment,” but I do know that pain unlocks a secret doorway in the mind. 

One that leads to both peak performance and beautiful silence. 

At first, when you push beyond your perceived capability your mind won’t shut thefuck up about it. 

It wants you to stop so it sends you into a spin cycle of panic anddoubt, which only amplifies your self-torture. 

But when you persist past that to thepoint that pain fully saturates the mind, you become single-pointed. 

The external world zeroes out. 

Boundaries dissolve and you feel connected to yourself, and to allthings, in the depth of your soul. 

That’s what I was after. 

Those moments of totalconnection and power, which came through me again in an even deeper way as Ireflected on where I’d come from and all I’d put myself through. 

For hours, I floated in that tranquil space, surrounded by light, feeling as muchgratitude as pain, as much appreciation as there was discomfort. 

At some point thereverie broke like a fever. 

I smiled, placed my palms over my watery eyes andrubbed the top and then the back of my head. 

At the base of my neck, I felt afamiliar knot. 

It bulged bigger than ever. 

I threw off the covers and examined theknots above my hip flexors next. 

Those had grown too. 

Could it be that basic? Could my suffering be linked to those knots? I flashed backto a session with an expert in stretching and advanced physical and mental trainingmethods the SEALs brought to our base in Coronado in 2010 named JoeHippensteel. 

Joe was an undersized decathlete in college, driven to make theOlympic team. 

But when you’re a 5’8” guy going up against world-classdecathletes who average 6’3” that isn’t easy. 

He decided to build up his lower bodyso he could override his genetics to jump higher and run faster than his bigger,stronger opponents. 

At one point he was squatting twice his own body weight forten sets of ten reps in one session, but with that increase in muscle mass came a lotof tension, and tension invited injury. 

The harder he trained, the more injuries hedeveloped and the more physical therapists he visited. 

When he was told he tore hishamstring before the trials, his Olympic dream died, and he realized he needed tochange the way he trained his body. 

He began balancing his strength work withextensive stretching and noticed whenever he reached a certain range of motion in agiven muscle group or joint, whatever pain lingered, vanished. 

He became his own guinea pig and developed optimal ranges of motion for everymuscle and joint in the human body. 

He never went to the doctor or physicaltherapists again because he found his own methodologies much more effective. 

Ifan injury cropped up, he treated himself with a stretching regimen. 

Over the yearshe built up a clientele and reputation among elite athletes in the area, and in 2010,was introduced to some Navy SEALs. 

Word spread at Naval Special WarfareCommand and he was eventually invited to introduce his range of motion routine toabout two dozen SEALs. 

I was one of them. 

As he lectured, he examined and stretched us out. 

The problem with most of theguys, he said, was our overuse of muscles without the appropriate balance offlexibility, and those issues traced back to Hell Week, when we were asked to dothousands of flutter kicks, then lie back in cold water with waves washing over us. 

He estimated it would take twenty hours of intensive stretching using his protocol toget most of us back to a normal range of motion in the hips, which can then bemaintained, he said, with just twenty minutes of stretching every day. 

Optimal rangeof motion required a larger commitment. 

When he got to me he took a good lookand shook his head. 

As you know, I’d tasted three Hell Weeks. 

He started to stretchme out, and said I was so locked up it was like trying to stretch steel cables. 

“You’re gonna need hundreds of hours,” he said. 

At the time, I didn’t pay him any mind because I had no plans to take up stretching. 

I was obsessed with strength and power, and everything I’d read suggested that an increase in flexibility meant an equal and opposite decrease in speed and force. 

Theview from my death bed altered my perspective. 

I pulled myself up, staggered to the bathroom mirror, turned, and examined the knoton my head. 

I stood as tall as I could. 

It looked like I’d lost not one, but nearly twoinches in height. 

My range of motion had never been worse. 

What if Joe was right?What if?One of my mottos these days is peaceful but never satisfied. 

It was one thing toenjoy the peace of self-acceptance, and my acceptance of the fucked-up world as itis, but that didn’t mean I was going to lie down and wait to die without at leasttrying to save myself. 

It didn’t mean then, and it doesn’t mean now, that I willaccept the imperfect or just plain wrong without fighting to change things for thebetter. 

I’d tried accessing the mainstream mind to find healing, but the doctors andtheir drugs didn’t do shit except make me feel a whole lot worse. 

I had no othercards to play. 

All I could do is try to stretch myself back to health. 

The first posture was simple. 

I sat on the ground and tried to cross my legs, Indianstyle, but my hips were so tight, my knees were up around my ears. 

I lost mybalance and rolled onto my back. 

It took all my strength to right myself and tryagain. 

I stayed in position for ten seconds, maybe fifteen, before straightening mylegs because it was too damn painful. 

Cramps squeezed and pinched every muscle in my lower body. 

Sweat oozed frommy pores, but after a short rest, I folded up my legs and took more pain. 

I cycledthrough that same stretch on and off for an hour and slowly, my body started toopen. 

I did a simple quad stretch next. 

The one we all learn to do in middle school. 

Standing on my left leg, I bent my right and grabbed my foot with my right hand. 

Joe was right. 

My quads were so bulky and tight it was like stretching steel cables. 

Again, I stayed in the posture until the pain was a seven out of ten. 

Then I took ashort break and hit the other side. 

That standing posture helped to release my quad and stretch out my psoas. 

Thepsoas is the only muscle connecting our spine to our lower legs. 

It wraps around theback of the pelvis, governs the hips, and is known as the fight or flight muscle. 

Asyou know, my whole life was fight or flight. 

As a young kid drowning in toxicstress, I worked that muscle overtime. 

Ditto during my three Hell Weeks, RangerSchool, and Delta Selection. 

Not to mention war. 

Yet I never did anything to loosenit up, and as an athlete I continued to tap my sympathetic nervous system and hadbeen grinding so hard my psoas continued to stiffen. 

Especially on long runs, wheresleep deprivation and cold weather came into play. 

Now, it was trying to choke mefrom the inside out. 

I’d learn later that it had tilted my pelvis, compressed my spine,and wrapped my connective tissue tight. 

It shaved two inches off my height. 

I spoketo Joe about it recently. 

“What was happening to you is an extreme case of what happens to 90 percent ofthe population,” he said. 

“Your muscles were so locked up that your blood wasn’tcirculating very well. 

They were like a frozen steak. 

You can’t inject blood into afrozen steak, and that’s why you were shutting down. 

” And it wouldn’t let go without a fight. 

Each stretch plunged me into the fire. 

I hadso much inflammation and internal stiffness, the slightest movement hurt, saynothing of long hold poses meant to isolate my quad and psoas. 

When I sat downand did the butterfly stretch next, the torture intensified. 

I stretched for two hours that day, woke up sore as hell, and got back after it. 

Onday two I stretched for six full hours. 

I did the same three poses over and over, thentried to sit on my heels, in a double quad stretch that was pure agony. 

I worked acalf stretch in too. 

Each session started off rough, but after an hour or two my bodyreleased enough for the pain to ease up. 

Before long I was folded into stretches for upwards of twelve hours a day. 

I wokeup at 6 a. 

m. 

, stretched until 9 a. 

m. 

, and then stretched on and off while at the desk atwork, especially when I was on the phone. 

I’d stretch out during my lunch hour andthen after I got home at 5 p. 

m. 

, I’d stretch until I hit the sack. 

I came up with a routine, starting at my neck and shoulders before moving into thehips, psoas, glutes, quads, hamstrings, and calves. 

Stretching became my newobsession. 

I bought a massage ball to tenderize my psoas. 

I propped a board upagainst a closed door at a seventy-degree angle and used it to stretch out my calf. 

I’d been suffering for the better part of two years, and after several months ofcontinual stretching, I noticed the bump at the base of my skull had started toshrink, along with the knots around my hip flexors, and my overall health andenergy level improved. 

I wasn’t anywhere close to flexible yet, and I wasn’tcompletely back to myself, but I was off all but my thyroid medication, and themore I stretched the more my condition improved. 

I kept at it for at least six hours aday for weeks. 

Then months and years. 

I’m still doing it. 

***I retired from the military as a Chief in the Navy, in November 2015, the onlymilitary man ever to be part of Air Force TAC-P, three Navy SEAL Hell Weeks inone year (completing two of them), and graduate BUD/S and Army Ranger School. 

It was a bittersweet moment because the military was a big part of my identity. 

Ithelped shape me and make me a better man, and I gave it everything I had. 

By then Bill Brown had moved on too. 

He grew up marginalized like me, wasn’tsupposed to amount to much, and even got bounced from his first BUD/S class byinstructors who questioned his intelligence. 

Today, he is a lawyer at a major firm inPhiladelphia. 

Freak Brown proved and continues to prove himself. 

Sledge is still in the SEAL Teams. 

When I met him he was a big time boozer, butafter our workouts his mentality changed. 

He went from never running at all torunning marathons. 

From not owning a bicycle to becoming one of the fastestcyclists in San Diego. 

He’s finished multiple Ironman triathlons. 

They say ironsharpens iron, and we proved that. 

Shawn Dobbs never became a SEAL, but he did become an Officer. 

He’s aLieutenant Commander these days, and he’s still a hell of an athlete. 

He’s anIronman, an accomplished cyclist, was honor man in the Navy’s Advanced DiveSchool, and later earned a graduate degree. 

One reason for all of his success is because he’s come to own his failure in Hell Week, which means it no longer ownshim. 

SBG is still in the Navy too, but he’s not messing with BUD/S candidates anymore. 

He analyzes data to make sure Naval Special Warfare continues to become smarter,stronger, and more effective than ever. 

He’s an egghead now. 

An egghead with anedge. 

But I was with him when he was at his physical peak, and he was a fuckingstud. 

Since our dark days in Buffalo and Brazil, my mother has also completelytransformed her life. 

She earned a master’s degree in education and serves as avolunteer on a domestic violence task force, when she’s not working as a seniorassociate vice president at a Nashville medical school. 

As for me, stretching helped me get my powers back. 

As my time in the militarywound down, while I was still in the rehab zone, I studied to recertify as an EMT. 

Once again, I utilized my long-hand memorization skills I’d been honing since highschool to finish at the top of my class. 

I also attended TEEX Fire TrainingAcademy, where I graduated Top Honor Man in my class. 

Eventually, I startedrunning again, this time with zero side effects, and when I got back into decentenough shape, I entered a few ultras and returned to the top spot in severalincluding the Strolling Jim 40-Miler in Tennessee, and Infinitus 88k in Vermont,both in 2016. 

But that wasn’t enough, so I became a wildland firefighter inMontana. 

After wrapping up my first season on the fire lines in the summer of 2015, I stoppedby my mother’s place in Nashville for a visit. 

At midnight her phone rang. 

Mymother is like me in the sense that she doesn’t have a wide circle of friends anddoesn’t get many phone calls during decent hours, so this was either a wrongnumber or an emergency. 

I could hear Trunnis Jr. 

on the other end of the line. 

I hadn’t seen or spoken to himin over fifteen years. 

Our relationship broke down the moment he chose to stay withour father rather than tough it out with us. 

For most of my life I found his decisionimpossible to forgive or accept, but like I said, I’d changed. 

Through the years, mymother kept me updated on the basics. 

He’d eventually stepped away from ourfather and his shady businesses, earned a PhD, and became a college administrator. 

He is also a great father to his kids. 

I could tell by my mom’s voice that something was wrong. 

All I remember hearingwas my mom asking, “Are you sure it’s Kayla?” When she hung up, she explainedthat Kayla, his eighteen-year-old daughter, had been hanging with friends inIndianapolis. 

At some point looser acquaintances rolled up, bad blood boiled, a gunwas pulled, shots rang out, and a stray bullet found one of the teenagers. 

When his ex-wife called him, in panic mode, he drove to the crime scene, but whenhe arrived he was held outside the yellow tape and kept in the dark. 

He could seeKayla’s car and a body under a tarp, but nobody would tell him if his daughter wasalive or dead. 

My mother and I hit the road immediately. 

I drove eighty mph through slanted rainfor five hours straight to Indianapolis. 

We pulled into his driveway shortly after he returned from the crime scene where, while standing outside the yellow tape, hewas asked to identify his daughter from a picture of her body taken on a detective’scell phone. 

He wasn’t offered the dignity of privacy or time to pay respects. 

He hadto do all that later. 

He opened the door, took a few steps toward us, and broke downcrying. 

My mother got there first. 

Then I pulled my brother in for a hug and all ofour bullshit issues no longer mattered. 

***The Buddha famously said that life is suffering. 

I’m not a Buddhist, but I knowwhat he meant and so do you. 

To exist in this world, we must contend withhumiliation, broken dreams, sadness, and loss. 

That’s just nature. 

Each specific lifecomes with its own personalized portion of pain. 

It’s coming for you. 

You can’t stopit. 

And you know it. 

In response, most of us are programmed to seek comfort as a way to numb it all outand cushion the blows. 

We carve out safe spaces. 

We consume media that confirmsour beliefs, we take up hobbies aligned with our talents, we try to spend as littletime as possible doing the tasks we fucking loathe, and that makes us soft. 

We live alife defined by the limits we imagine and desire for ourselves because it’scomfortable as hell in that box. 

Not just for us, but for our closest family andfriends. 

The limits we create and accept become the lens through which they see us. 

Through which they love and appreciate us. 

But for some, those limits start to feel like bondage, and when we least expect it,our imagination jumps those walls and hunts down dreams that in the immediateaftermath feel attainable. 

Because most dreams are. 

We are inspired to makechanges little by little, and it hurts. 

Breaking the shackles and stretching beyond ourown perceived limits takes hard fucking work—oftentimes physical work—andwhen you put yourself on the line, self doubt and pain will greet you with a stingingcombination that will buckle your knees. 

Most people who are merely inspired or motivated will quit at that point, and upontheir return, their cells will feel that much smaller, their shackles even tighter. 

Thefew who remain outside their walls will encounter even more pain and much moredoubt, courtesy of those who we thought were our biggest fans. 

When it was timefor me to lose 106 pounds in less than three months, everyone I talked to told methere was no way I could do it. 

“Don’t expect too much,” they all said. 

Their weak-ass dialogue only fed my own self doubt. 

But it’s not the external voice that will break you down. 

It’s what you tell yourselfthat matters. 

The most important conversations you’ll ever have are the ones you’llhave with yourself. 

You wake up with them, you walk around with them, you go tobed with them, and eventually you act on them. 

Whether they be good or bad. 

We are all our own worst haters and doubters because self doubt is a naturalreaction to any bold attempt to change your life for the better. 

You can’t stop it fromblooming in your brain, but you can neutralize it, and all the other external chatterby asking, What if? What if is an exquisite fuck-you to anyone who has ever doubted your greatness orstood in your way. 

It silences negativity. 

It’s a reminder that you don’t really knowwhat you’re capable of until you put everything you’ve got on the line. 

It makes theimpossible feel at least a little more possible. 

What if is the power and permission toface down your darkest demons, your very worst memories, and accept them as partof your history. 

If and when you do that, you will be able to use them as fuel toenvision the most audacious, outrageous achievement and go get it. 

We live in a world with a lot of insecure, jealous people. 

Some of them are our bestfriends. 

They are blood relatives. 

Failure terrifies them. 

So does our success. 

Because when we transcend what we once thought possible, push our limits, andbecome more, our light reflects off all the walls they’ve built up around them. 

Yourlight enables them to see the contours of their own prison, their own self-limitations. 

But if they are truly the great people you always believed them to be,their jealousy will evolve, and soon their imagination might hop its fence, and itwill be their turn to change for the better. 

I hope that’s what this book has done for you. 

I hope that right now you are nose-to-concrete with your own bullshit limits you didn’t even know were there. 

I hopeyou’re willing to do the work to break them down. 

I hope you’re willing to change. 

You’ll feel pain, but if you accept it, endure it, and callous your mind, you’ll reach apoint where not even pain can hurt you. 

There is a catch, however. 

When you livethis way, there is no end to it. 

Thanks to all that stretching, I’m in better shape at forty-three than I was in mytwenties. 

Back then I was always sick, wound tight, and stressed out. 

I neveranalyzed why I kept getting stress fractures. 

I just taped that shit up. 

No matter whatailed my body or my mind I had the same solution. 

Tape it up and move the fuckon. 

Now I’m smarter than I’ve ever been. 

And I’m still getting after it. 

In 2018 I went back to the mountains to become a wildland firefighter again. 

Ihadn’t been in the field for three years, and since then I’d gotten used to training innice gyms and living in comfort. 

Some might call it luxury. 

I was in a plush hotelroom in Vegas when the 416 fire sparked and I got the call. 

What started as a 2,000-acre grass fire in the San Juan Range of Colorado’s Rocky Mountains was growinginto a record breaking, 55,000-acre monster. 

I hung up and caught a prop plane toGrand Junction, loaded up in a U. 

S. 

Forest Service truck, and drove three hours tothe outskirts of Durango, Colorado, where I suited up in my green Nomex pants andyellow, long-sleeved button down, my hard hat, field glasses, and gloves, andgrabbed my super Pulaski—a wildland fire fighter’s most trusted weapon. 

I can digfor hours with that thing, and that’s what we do. 

We don’t spray water. 

Wespecialize in containment, and that means digging lines and clearing brush sothere’s no fuel in the path of an inferno. 

We dig and run, run and dig, until everymuscle is spent. 

Then we do it all over again. 

On our first day and night we dug fire lines around vulnerable homes as walls offlames marched forward from less than a mile away. 

We glimpsed the burn throughthe trees and felt the heat in the drought-stricken forest. 

From there we weredeployed to 10,000 feet and worked on a forty-five-degree slope, digging as deep aspossible, trying to get to the mineral soil that won’t burn. 

At one point a tree fell andmissed hitting one of my teammates by eight inches. 

It would have killed him. 

Wecould smell smoke in the air. 

Our sawyers—the chainsaw experts—kept cutting dead and dying trees. 

We hauled that brush out beyond a creek bed. 

Piles werescattered every fifty feet for over three miles. 

Each one measured roughly seven toeight feet tall. 

We worked like that for a week of eighteen-hour shifts at $12 an hour, before taxes. 

It was eighty degrees during the day and thirty-six degrees at night. 

When the shiftwas over we laid out our mats and slept in the open wherever we were. 

Then wokeup and got back after it. 

I didn’t change my clothes for six days. 

Most of the peopleon my crew were at least fifteen years younger than me. 

All of them were hard asnails and among the very hardest working people I’ve ever met. 

Including andespecially the women. 

None of them ever complained. 

When we were done we’dcleared a line 3. 

2 miles long, wide enough to stop a monster from burning down amountain. 

At forty-three, my wildland firefighting career is just getting started. 

I love beingpart of a team of hard motherfuckers like them, and my ultra career is about to beborn again too. 

I’m just young enough to bring hell on and still contend for titles. 

I’m running faster now than I ever have, and I don’t need any tape or props for myfeet. 

When I was thirty-three I ran at an 8:35 per mile pace. 

Now I’m running 7:15per mile very comfortably. 

I’m still getting used to this new, flexible, fullyfunctioning body, and getting accustomed to my new self. 

My passion still burns, but to be honest, it takes a bit longer to channel my rage. 

It’snot camped out on my home screen anymore, a single unconscious twitch fromoverwhelming my heart and head. 

Now I have to access it consciously. 

But when Ido, I can still feel all the challenges and obstacles, the heartbreak and hard work,like it happened yesterday. 

That’s why you can feel my passion on podcasts andvideos. 

That shit is still there, seared into my brain like scar tissue. 

Tailing me like ashadow that’s trying to chase me down and swallow me whole, but always drivesme forward. 

Whatever failures and accomplishments pile up in the years to come, and there willbe plenty of both I’m sure, I know I’ll continue to give it my all and set goals thatseem impossible to most. 

And when those motherfuckers say so, I’ll look them deadin the eye and respond with one simple question. 

What if?    OceanofPDF. 

com   ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis book was seven years in the making with six failed attempts along the waybefore being introduced to the first, and only, writer who truly understood mypassion and captured my voice. 

I want to thank Adam Skolnick for the countlesshours spent learning everything about me and my fucked-up life to help pulltogether all the pieces and bring my story to life in print. 

Words can’t express howproud I am of the truthfulness, vulnerability, and raw candor of this book. 

Jennifer Kish, I do not have the words. 

A lot of people say that, but it is the truth. 

Only you truly know how hard this process was for me to pull off, and without youby my side there would be no book at all. 

It is because of you I was able to taketime off of writing to go fight fires while you took care of all the business behindthe book. 

Knowing I had “Kish” in my corner enabled me to make the very ballsydecision to self-publish! It’s because of your work ethic that I had the confidence toturn down a substantial book advance—knowing that you alone can shoulder whatan entire publishing house can do! All I can say is thank you and I love you. 

My mom, Jackie Gardner, we have had a hard, fucked-up life. 

One that we can bothbe proud of because there are many times we have been knocked flat on our asseswith no one around to pick us up. 

Somehow we found a way to always get the fuckup. 

I know there were many times when you were concerned for me and wanted meto stop, thank you for never acting upon your feelings as it allowed me to find moreof me. 

For most people, this is not how you would talk to your mother as a thankyou, but only you know how powerful this message truly is. 

Stay hard; love you,Mom. 

My brother, Trunnis. 

Our lives and the way we grew up at times made us enemies,but when the shit hit the fan, we were there for one another. 

At the end of the day,that is true brotherhood to me. 

Much appreciation and thanks to the following people who allowed Adam and I tointerview them for this book. 

Your recollection of the events helped me create anaccurate and true depiction of my life and how these particular events unfolded. 

My cousin, Damien, while you were always the favorite growing up, I had some ofmy better times in life hanging out with you just doing stupid shit. 

Johnny Nichols, our friendship while growing up in Brazil was the only positivething I had at times. 

Not many people know the darkness that I experienced as a kidlike you do. 

Thanks for being there when I truly needed you most. 

Kirk Freeman, I want to thank you for your honesty. 

You were one of the fewpeople who were willing to tell the painful truth about some of my challenges inBrazil, and for that I will forever be grateful. 

Scott Gearen, to this day, you will never know how much your story and you justbeing you helped me at a time in my life where darkness was all I could see. 

Youhave no idea the impact you had on a fourteen-year-old kid. 

It’s a true saying, younever know who is watching you. 

I happened to be watching you that day at PJOCschool. 

Grateful for your friendship after all these years. 

 Victor Peña, I have many stories to tell, but the one thing I will say is that you werealways there through thick and thin and always gave everything you had. 

For that,mad respect, brother. 

Steven Schaljo, if it weren’t for you, there might not even be a book. 

You were thebest recruiter in the Navy. 

Thanks again for believing in me. 

Kenny Bigbee, thanks for being the other “Black guy” at BUD/S. 

Your sense ofhumor was always right on time. 

Stay hard, brother. 

To the white David Goggins, Bill Brown, your willingness to go the distance in thehardest of times made me better in the hardest of times. 

Last time I saw you, wewere on a mission in Iraq, I was manning a . 

50 cal and you were manning an M60. 

Hope to see you stateside in the near future!Drew Sheets, thank you for having the courage to be in the front of the boat withme in my third Hell Week. 

Very few know how heavy that shit is! Who would everthink that a redneck and a black guy would become so tight? It’s true what they say,opposites attract!Shawn Dobbs, it takes a lot of courage to do what you did in this book. 

I put myselfout there to the reader, but you didn’t have to! All I can say is thank you forallowing me to share part of your story. 

It will change lives!Brent Gleeson, one of the few guys I know where “the first time, every time” trulyapplies. 

Very few will even know what this means. 

Stay hard, Brent!SBG, you were one of the first SEALs I ever met and you set the bar high. 

Thankyou for pushing me in all three of my BUD/S classes and for the quick heart ratemonitoring training class!Dana De Coster, to the best swim buddy a guy could ever have. 

Your leadershipduring my first platoon was second to none!Sledge, all I can say is that iron definitely sharpens iron! Thanks for being one ofthe few guys who got after it with me every fucking day and was willing to goagainst the grain and be misunderstood in your quest to get better. 

Morgan Luttrell, 2-5! We will always be connected from our moment in Yuma. 

Chris Kostman, you unknowingly forced me to find a whole other level of myself. 

John Metz, thank you for allowing an inexperienced man into your race. 

It changedmy life forever. 

Chris Roman, your professionalism and attention to detail have always amazed me. 

You are a big reason why I was able to get third in one of the hardest foot races onthe planet. 

Edie Rosenthal, thank you for all of your support and the amazing work you do forthe Special Operations Warrior Foundation. 

 Admiral Ed Winters, humbled to have worked with you for so many years. 

Workingfor an Admiral definitely put pressure on me to bring my very best at all times. 

Thank you for your continued support. 

Steve (“Wiz”) Wisotzki, justice was done and I thank you for that. 

Hawk, when you sent me that email about “the 13 percent,” I knew we werekindred spirits. 

You are one of the few people in this world who understand me andmy mentality without explanation. 

Doc Schreckengaust, thank you for putting me in for that echo. 

That shit just mighthave saved my life!T. 

, thanks for pushing me on that ruck, brother! Continue charging. 

Ronald Cabarles, continue leading by example and staying hard. 

Class 03-04RLTW. 

Joe Hippensteel, thanks for showing me the proper ways to stretch. 

It’s trulychanged my life!Ryan Dexter, thanks for walking with me for seventy-five miles and helping me getto 205 miles!Keith Kirby, thanks for your continued support throughout the years. 

Nandor Tamaska, thank you for opening your gym to me and my team for the pull-up record. 

Your hospitality, kindness, and support will never be forgotten. 

Dan Cottrell, to give without expecting anything in return is a rare find. 

Thank youfor allowing one of my dreams to be a jumper in my forties come true!Fred Thompson, thank you for allowing me to work with your amazing team thisyear. 

I learned so much from you and your crew. 

Mad respect!Marc Adelman, thank you for being part of the team from day one and for yourcounsel at every step along the way. 

Way to push past your perceived limitationsthis year. 

I am proud of all of your accomplishments!BrandFire, thank you for your creative genius and the creation of david goggins. 

com. 

Finally, my sincere gratitude and appreciation for the amazing team at ScribeMedia. 

From the first contact with Tucker Max to the last and every touch point inbetween, you and every member of your team over-delivered just as you said youwould! Special thanks to the consummate professional Ellie Cole, my PublishingManager; Zach Obront for helping create an amazing marketing plan; Hal Clifford,my editor; and Erin Tyler, the most talented cover designer I could ever imagine,who helped create the sickest book cover of all time!

com   ABOUT THE AUTHORDAVID  GOGGINS is a retired Navy SEAL and the only member of the U. 

S. 

Armed Forces ever to complete SEAL training, U. 

S. 

Army Ranger School, and AirForce Tactical Air Controller training. 

Goggins has competed in more than sixtyultra-marathons, triathlons, and ultra-triathlons, setting new course records andregularly placing in the top five. 

A former Guinness World Record holder forcompleting 4,030 pull-ups in seventeen hours, he’s a much-sought-after publicspeaker who’s shared his story with the staffs of Fortune 500 companies,professional sports teams, and hundreds of thousands of students across the country.

To my North Star that has always shined, even on the darkest of nights.  Contents Warning Order Introduction 1. 

Maximize Minimal Potential Evolution No. 

1 2. 

Merry Christmas Evolution No. 

2 3. 

The Mental Lab Evolution No. 

3 4. 

A Savage Reborn Evolution No. 

4  5. 

Disciple of Discipline Evolution No. 

5 6. 

The Art of Getting Hit in the Mouth Evolution No. 

6 7. 

The Reckoning Evolution No. 

7 8. 

Play until the Whistle Evolution No. 

8 9. 

Wringing Out the Soul Acknowledgments     WARNING ORDER TIME ZONE: 24/7 TASK ORGANIZATION: SOLO MISSION SITUATION: Your horizons have been limited by societal and self-imposed barriers. 

MISSION: Fight through resistance. 

Seek unknown territory. 

Redefine what’s possible. 

EXECUTION: Read this book cover to cover. 

Absorb the philosophy within. 

Test all theories to the best of your ability. 

Repeat. 

Repetition will sharpen new skills and stimulate growth. 

This will not be easy. 

To succeed, you will be required to face hard truths and challenge yourself like never before. 

This mission is about embracing and learning the lessons from each and every Evolution so you can discover who you really are and can become. 

Self-mastery is an unending process. 

Your job is NEVER FINISHED! CLASSIFIED: The real work is unseen. 

Your performance matters most when nobody is watching. 

BY COMMAND OF: DAVID GOGGINS SIGNED:  RANK AND SERVICE: CHIEF, U.S. 

NAVY SEALS, RETIRED     Introduction This is not a self-help book. 

Nobody needs another sermon about the ten steps or seven stages or sixteen hours a week that will deliver them from their stalled or jacked-up life. 

Hit the local bookstore or surf Amazon and you will slip into a bottomless pit of self-help hype. 

Must feel good to consume because it sure does sell. 

Too bad most of it won’t work. 

Not for real. 

Not forever. 

You might see progress here and there, but if you are broken like I used to be or stuck wandering an endless plateau while your true potential wastes away, books alone can’t and won’t fix you. 

Self-help is a fancy term for self-improvement, and while we should always strive to be better, improvement is often not enough. 

There are times in life when we become so disconnected from ourselves that we must drill down and rewire those cut connections in our hearts, minds, and souls. 

Because that is the only way to rediscover and reignite belief—that flicker in the darkness with the power to spark your evolution. 

Belief is a gritty, potent, primordial force. 

In the 1950s, a scientist named Dr. 

Curt Richter proved this when he gathered dozens of rats and dropped them into thirty- inch-deep glass cylinders filled with water. 

The first rat paddled on the surface for a short time, then swam to the bottom, where it looked for an escape hatch. 

It died within two minutes. 

Several others followed that same pattern. 

Some lasted as long as fifteen minutes, but they all gave up. 

Richter was surprised because rats are good swimmers, yet in his lab, they drowned without much of a fight. 

So, he tweaked the test. 

After he placed the next batch in their jars, Richter watched them, and right before it looked like they were about to give up, he and his techs scooped up the rats, toweled them off, and held them long enough for their heart and respiratory rates to normalize. 

Long enough for them to register, on a physiological scale, that they had been saved. 

They did this a few times before Richter placed a group of them back into those evil cylinders again to see how long they would last on their own. 

This time, the rats didn’t give up. 

They swam their hearts out…for an average of sixty  hours without any food or rest. 

One swam for eighty-one hours. 

In his report, Richter suggested that the first round of subjects gave up because they were hopeless and that the second batch persisted for so long because they knew it was possible someone would come along and save them. 

The popular analysis these days is that Richter’s interventions flipped a switch in the rat brain, which illuminated the power of hope for us all to see. 

I love this experiment, but hope isn’t what got into those rats. 

How long does hope really last? It may have triggered something initially, but no creature is going to swim for their life for sixty hours straight, without food, powered by hope alone. 

They needed something a lot stronger to keep them breathing, kicking, and fighting. 

When mountaineers tackle the tallest peaks and steepest faces, they are usually tethered to a rope fixed to anchors in the ice or rock so when they slip, they don’t slide off the mountain and tumble to their deaths. 

They may fall ten or twelve feet, then get up, dust themselves off, and try again. 

Life is the mountain we are all climbing, but hope is not an anchor point. 

It’s too soft, fluffy, and fleeting. 

There’s no substance behind hope. 

It’s not a muscle you can develop, and it’s not rooted down deep. 

It’s an emotion that comes and goes. 

Richter touched something in his rats that was nearly unbreakable. 

He may not have noticed them adapting to their life-or-death trial, but they had to have figured out a more efficient technique to preserve energy. 

With each passing minute, they became more and more resilient until they started to believe that they would survive. 

Their confidence didn’t fade as the hours piled up; it actually grew. 

They weren’t hoping to be saved. 

They refused to die! The way I see it, belief is what turned ordinary lab rats into marine mammals. 

There are two levels to belief. 

There’s the surface level, which our coaches, teachers, therapists, and parents love to preach. 

“Believe in yourself,” they all say, as if the thought alone can keep us afloat when the odds are against us in the battle of our lives. 

But once exhaustion sets in, doubt and insecurity tend to penetrate and dissipate that flimsy brand of belief.  Then there’s the belief born in resilience. 

It comes from working your way through layers of pain, fatigue, and reason, and ignoring the ever-present temptation to quit until you strike a source of fuel you didn’t even know existed. 

One that eliminates all doubt, makes you certain of your strength and the fact that eventually, you will prevail, so long as you keep moving forward. 

That is the level of belief that can defy the expectations of scientists and change everything. 

It’s not an emotion to be shared or an intellectual concept, and nobody else can give it to you. 

It must bubble up from within. 

When you are lost at sea and no one is coming to save you, there are only two options. 

You will either swim hard and figure out how to last as long as it takes, or you are bound to drown. 

I was born with holes in my heart and sickle cell trait, and into a childhood torched by toxic stress and learning disabilities. 

I had minimal potential, and by the time I turned twenty-four, I knew I was in danger of wasting my life. 

Many people get it twisted and think my accomplishments directly correlate to my potential. 

My accomplishments do not equate to my potential. 

The little bit I had was buried so deep, most people would never have found it. 

Not only did I find it, I learned to maximize it. 

I knew that there could be so much more to my story than the wreckage I saw around me, and that it was time to decide if I had it in me to go as hard as I could for as long as it took to become a more self-empowered human being. 

I fought through doubt and insecurity. 

I wanted to quit every single day, but eventually, belief kicked in. 

I believed I could evolve, and that same belief has given me the strength and focus to persevere whenever I’ve been challenged for over two decades. 

More often than not, I’ve challenged myself to see how far I can push it and how many more chapters I can add to my story. 

I’m still seeking new territory, still curious just how high I might rise from the bottom of the barrel. 

A lot of folks feel like they are missing something in their lives—something money can’t buy—and that makes them miserable. 

They attempt to fill the void with material things they can see, feel, and touch. 

But that empty feeling won’t go away. 

It fades some until all gets quiet again. 

Then that familiar gnawing in their gut returns, reminding them that the life they are living is not the fullest expression of who they are or might become.  Unfortunately, most people are not desperate enough to do anything about it. 

When you’re hogtied in conflicting emotions and other people’s opinions, it’s impossible to tap into belief and easy to drift away from that urge to evolve. 

You could be itchy to experience something different, to be somewhere different, or to become someone different, but when the slightest resistance arises to challenge your resolve, you moonwalk right back into the unsatisfied person you were before. 

Still itchy, still jonesing to be someone new, yet still trapped in your unfulfilling status quo. 

And you are nowhere near alone. 

Social media has compounded and spread this virus of dissatisfaction, which is why the world is now populated by damaged people consuming airy gratification, hunting an immediate dopamine fix with no substance at all behind it. 

Instead of staying focused on growth, millions of minds have been infected with lack, leaving them feeling even lesser than. 

Their internal dialogue becomes that much more toxic, as this population of weak, entitled victims of life itself multiplies. 

It’s funny, we question so many things about the way our lives are going. 

We wonder what it would be like if we looked different, had more of a head start, or were given a boost at one time or another. 

Very few people question their own warped minds. 

Instead, they collect slights, dramas, and problems, hoarding them until they are bloated with stale regret and envy, which form the roadblocks stopping them from becoming their truest, most capable selves. 

All over the world, hundreds of millions of people choose to live that way. 

But there is another way of thinking and another way of being. 

It helped me regain control of my life. 

It allowed me to eviscerate all obstacles in my path until my growth factor became near limitless. 

I’m still haunted, but I’ve traded in my demons for evil angels, and now, it’s a good haunting. 

I’m haunted by my future goals, not my past failures. 

I’m haunted by what I may still become. 

I’m haunted by my own continued thirst for evolution. 

The work is often as miserable and thankless as it ever was, and although there are techniques and skills I’ve developed that can help along the way, there is no certain number of principles, hours, or steps in this process. 

It’s about constant effort, learning, and adaptation, which demands unwavering discipline and belief. 

The kind that looks a lot like desperation. 

See, I am the lab rat who refused to die! And I’m here to show you how to get to the other side of hell.  Most theories on performance and possibility are hatched in the controlled environment of a sterile laboratory and spread in university lecture halls. 

But I am not a theorist. 

I am a practitioner. 

Similar to how the late, great Stephen Hawking explored the dark matter of the universe, I am intensely passionate about exploring the dark matter of the mind—all of our untapped energy, capacity, and power. 

My philosophy has been tested and proven in my own Mental Lab through all the many trials and tribulations that shaped my life in the real world. 

After each chapter, you will find an Evolution. 

In the military, evolutions are drills, exercises, or practices meant to sharpen your skills. 

In this book, they are hard truths we should all face, and philosophies and strategies you can use to overcome whatever is in your way—and excel in life. 

Like I said, this is definitely not a self-help book. 

This is boot camp for your brain. 

It’s a what-are-you-doing-with-your-life book. 

It’s the wake-up call you don’t want and probably didn’t even know you needed. 

Rise up! Time to get to work! Chapter One    1. 

Maximize Minimal Potential I sat among thousands of combat veterans in a packed Kansas City Convention Center for the 2018 Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) National Convention. 

I wasn’t just an active member; I was their guest. 

I’d been flown in to receive the VFW’s prestigious Americanism Award—an annual honor for those who demonstrate a commitment to service, patriotism, the betterment of American society, and helping fellow veterans. 

The most famous past recipient was one of my heroes. 

Senator John McCain survived five and a half years as a POW during the Vietnam War. 

I’ve always admired the courage he exemplified back then, and throughout his very public life, he continued to set the standard for how I believe men should handle hard times. 

Now my name was going to be alongside his. 

I was about to receive the greatest honor of my life so far. 

I should have been proud as hell. 

Instead, I was mystified. 

For over an hour, I sat in the audience between my mother, Jackie, and my uncle, John Gardner. 

That’s a lot of time to contemplate the meaning of the moment, and all I could come up with were the reasons that I shouldn’t be there. 

That nobody should know the name David Goggins, much less put me in the same sentence as Senator McCain. 

Not because I didn’t earn my spot, but because the circumstances that life served me should never have led me here. 

Sure, I’m a winner now, but I was born a loser. 

There are a lot of born losers out there. 

Every day, babies are born into poverty and broken families, like I was. 

Some lose their parents in accidents. 

Others are abused and neglected. 

Many of us are born with disabilities, some physical, others mental or emotional. 

It’s as if every human being is issued their own personal piñata just for making it out of the womb alive. 

No one gets a sneak preview of what’s in their piñata, but whatever it is will set them up one way or another. 

Some of us smack it open and sweet things rain down. 

Those are the ones who have it relatively easy—at least at first. 

Some are empty as a dry well. 

Others are worse than empty. 

They’re packed with nightmares, and the haunting begins as soon as the baby takes its first breath. 

That was me. 

I was born into a terror dome.  As the speakers took their turns on the mic, I was deep in my own dark cave, reliving the countless bloody beatings my father dealt to my mother, my brother, and me. 

I watched us escape to Brazil, Indiana, only to settle just ten miles from an active chapter of the Ku Klux Klan. 

And guess where they sent their kids to school? I recalled the steady flow of racist threats from some of my classmates and how I cheated my way through school and learned nothing. 

I thought of my mother’s fiancé, Wilmoth, a would-be father figure who was murdered before he could become my stepdad. 

I recalled my repeated attempts at the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB), a standardized test required for all military recruits, to fulfill my dream of becoming a Pararescueman. 

After I finally passed that dreaded test and enlisted, I quit Pararescue training when the water evolutions became too hard. 

That brilliant decision ultimately led to me becoming a three-hundred-pound graveyard-shift exterminator at Ecolab, raking in $1,000 a month at twenty-four years old. 

I was a shell of a man at that point, with no self-esteem or self-respect. 

I was still haunted by the same old demons that had tailed me from birth, and the harsh reality was that I lacked everything I needed to become the man I wanted to be. 

Mind you, I wasn’t thinking about all of that to punish myself. 

I was sifting through the files, searching for the catalyst, the moment that restarted the fire and ignited something primal inside me. 

I needed to remember exactly how and when I flipped the script and managed to build a life of honor and service, but I kept coming up empty. 

I was so deep in my brain cave I didn’t even hear them call my name. 

I wouldn’t have reacted at all if my mom hadn’t nudged my arm. 

Even now, I don’t remember walking up the stage steps with her because I was still floating between my past and my disorienting present. 

I heard them read my résumé, detailing the money I’d raised for veteran causes and the objectives I’d met over the course of my career. 

Before I knew it, they put a medal around my neck and the audience was on their feet applauding. 

That was the surest sign yet that this born loser had been reborn somewhere along the way. 

That there had been a moment that sparked my metamorphosis.  When it was my turn at the microphone, I gazed out at all the unfamiliar faces. 

Members of a brotherhood and sisterhood that I will always be a part of. 

The fact that this recognition came from them was the deepest honor, but I didn’t know how to thank them. 

I was a sought-after public speaker by then, comfortable in front of crowds large and small. 

Factor in my work as a recruiter for the military, and I’d been a professional public speaker for over a decade. 

I rarely got butterflies, but that summer day in Kansas City, I was nervous as hell and my mind was still clouded. 

I tried to shake it off and started by thanking my grandfather, Sergeant Jack. 

“He would be the proudest man in the world to see me up here right now,” I said. 

Choked up, I paused, took a deep breath to compose myself, and started again. 

“I’d like to thank my mom, who…” I turned to my mother, and when our eyes met, the moment that permanently changed my life finally hit me, and the power of that realization was overwhelming. 

“I’d like to thank my mom, who…” My voice cracked again. 

I couldn’t hold back the flood any longer. 

I closed my eyes and sobbed. 

Like a dream that only lasts seconds yet feels like hours, time stretched out and scenes from the ultimate turning point in my life—the last time I ever saw my father—colonized my mind. 

If I hadn’t taken that trip, you’d never have heard of me.  It finally hit me and I was overwhelmed by the work it took to get here. 

*** I was twenty-four years old when I realized I was broken inside. 

Something had gone numb in my soul, and that numbness, that lack of deep feeling, dictated what my life had become. 

It’s why I quit going after my goals, my biggest dreams, whenever things got hard. 

Quitting was just another detour. 

It never bothered me much because when you’re numb, you can’t process what’s happening to you or within you. 

I didn’t know the power of the mind yet, and because of that I had ballooned into a fat boy and taken a job as a cockroach sniper in restaurants.  I had my excuses, of course. 

My numbness was a survival mechanism. 

It had been beaten into me by my father. 

By the time I’d turned seven, I’d developed a POW mindset. 

Going numb was how I took my beatings and maintained some level of self-respect. 

Even after my mother and I escaped, I continued to be stalked by tragedy and failure, and numbness was how I coped with the fact that losing was all I ever knew. 

When you’re born a loser, your goal is to survive, not thrive. 

You learn to lie, to cheat, to do what it takes to fit in. 

You may become a survivor, but it’s a miserable existence. 

Just like the cockroaches I was assigned to kill, you find yourself scurrying in from the shadows to claim the bare necessities while hiding your true self from the light at all costs. 

Born losers are the ultimate cockroaches. 

We do what we have to, and that attitude often enables some pretty severe character defects. 

I certainly had some. 

I was a quitter, a liar, fat and lazy, and I was deeply depressed. 

I could feel myself unraveling a little at a time. 

Fed up and frustrated, bitter and angry, I couldn’t take much more of my sorry excuse for a life. 

If I didn’t change, and change soon, I knew I would die a loser, or worse. 

I might end up like my father, the hustler who was one quick twitch away from violence. 

I was consumed by misery and groping for some mental foothold to keep me from giving up for good. 

The only thing I could come up with was to go back to that house on Paradise Road that still haunted me. 

I had to get to Buffalo, New York, and look my father in the eye. 

Because when you’re living in hell, the only way to find your way out is to confront the Devil himself. 

I was hoping to find some answers that would help me change my life. 

That was what I told myself, anyway, as I crossed into Ohio from Indiana and veered northeast. 

I hadn’t seen my old man in twelve years. 

It had been my decision to stop seeing him. 

At that time, the court system allowed children to make those decisions once they turned twelve. 

I made that choice mostly out of respect for and loyalty to my mom. 

He’d stopped beating us after we left Buffalo, but the one thing that never went numb was how I felt about what my mother endured at his hands. 

Still, over the years, I had questioned that decision and began to wonder if my memories, if the stories I told myself, were true. 

On the long drive, I didn’t listen to music. 

All I heard were the competing voices in my head. 

The first voice accepted me as I was.  It’s not your fault, David. 

None of this is your fault. 

You’re doing the best you can with what you’ve been given. 

That was the voice I’d been listening to my entire life. 

It’s not my fault was my favorite refrain. 

It explained and justified my lot in life and the dead-end path in front of me, and it played 24/7. 

However, for the first time, another voice chimed in. 

Or maybe it was the first time I stopped listening only to what I wanted to hear. 

Roger that. 

It ain’t your fault that you were dealt a bad hand, but…it is your responsibility. 

How long will you allow your past to hold you back before you finally take control of your future? Compared to the first, more nurturing voice in my head, this one was ice cold, and I did my best to tune it out. 

The closer I got to Buffalo, the younger and more helpless I felt. 

When I was 150 miles away, I felt like I was sixteen years old. 

As I pulled off the highway and wound through the Buffalo city streets, I felt like I was eight, the same age I was when we packed all our belongings into garbage bags and walked out the door. 

Once I walked into the house, it was August 1983 all over again. 

The paint on the walls, the floors, the appliances and the furniture, all of it was the same. 

While it looked a lot smaller and out of date, it was still the haunted house I remembered, filled with years of grisly memories and palpable dark energy. 

However, my father was warm and more affectionate than I remembered. 

Trunnis was always a charmer, and he acted genuinely happy to see me. 

As we caught up, I found myself laughing at his jokes, slightly confused by the man in front of me. 

After a while, he checked his watch and grabbed his coat. 

He held the front door open for his wife, Sue, and me as we headed for the car. 

“Where are we going?” I asked.  “You remember the schedule,” he said. 

“It’s time to open up.” The first thing I noticed about Skateland from the outside was that it needed a paint job. 

Inside, the floor and walls were chipped and stained, and the whole place smelled funky. 

The office had deteriorated too. 

That sofa we slept on as kids, where my mom caught him cheating on more than one occasion, still hadn’t been replaced. 

It was filthy, and that’s where I sat after the grand tour while my father headed upstairs to spin hip-hop records in the Vermillion Room. 

I felt dizzy and disoriented. 

It was strange how far the old man had let his standards slip. 

He wasn’t the strong, exacting, demanding figure I’d remembered. 

He was old, weak, soft in the middle, and lazy. 

He didn’t even appear to be that mean anymore. 

He wasn’t the Devil at all. 

He was human. 

Had I been feeding myself a false history? As I lingered in that office, steeped in the past, I wondered what else I’d been wrong about? Then, at around ten o’clock, the bass line dropped upstairs and the ceiling started to shudder and shake. 

Within seconds, I heard hollering, laughter, and that steady stomping to the beat. 

In the same way a song can take you back to a distinct time and place, that thumping bass returned me to my darkest days. 

I’d been funneled into a relapse of my childhood nightmare. 

I closed my eyes and saw myself as a first grader, tossing and turning on that very couch, trying to sleep after working all night and not being able to get more than a wink. 

My mother was there too, struggling to paper over our pain with “home- cooked” dinners prepared on portable electric burners in the cramped office. 

I saw the helplessness and fear in her eyes, and it brought back all the stress, pain, frustration, and depression that came with it. 

Those memories were real! There was no denying it! I was disgusted to be sitting on that couch. 

I was sickened to have let my guard down and enjoyed my father’s company, even for a few minutes. 

I felt like I was doing a disservice to my mother, and the longer I sat there and watched the ceiling shake, the more rage rose up inside until I was on my feet and racing up a back stairwell into the Vermillion Room, where my demon was slurping whiskey—the  smoky elixir that gave him his power. 

As a kid, I rarely saw the space in full bloom, and while it had lost most of its shine, it was still happening. 

What was once a glitzy nightclub serving funk to a well-dressed crowd had become a packed dive bar flush with hip-hop. 

Trunnis was in the DJ booth orchestrating the energy, spinning records, and sucking down scotch after scotch until closing time. 

I watched him work, drink, and flirt, and the more wasted he became, the more my memory synced with reality. 

After locking up, I drove us all to Denny’s for an after-hours breakfast, just like old times. 

More than fifteen years had passed, yet the ritual remained the same as ever. 

Trunnis was sloppy by then, and he could tell it made me uncomfortable, which ticked him off. 

While we waited for our food, he glared at me as he dissed my grandparents and claimed they were responsible for the breakup of his family. 

Liquor always brought his ugliness out, and I’d heard that argument so many times before, it didn’t have much effect on me. 

But when he started in on my mom, I wasn’t having any of it. 

“Don’t go there,” I said quietly. 

But he didn’t care. 

He barked about how everyone turned on him and how weak and sorry we all were. 

His spittle flew. 

The vein in his temple throbbed. 

“Trunnis, please stop,” Sue said. 

There was something in her tone, a mixture of fear and dread, that I recognized. 

She wasn’t standing up and telling him how she felt. 

She was pleading with him. 

It reminded me so much of my mother and how powerless she felt when Trunnis would rage on and on. 

He was the type of guy who would call a woman over to the house at 3:55 p.m., knowing my mom would be coming home at four o’clock. 

He wanted her to catch them in the act to show her that he had all the power and would do whatever he wanted at any time of day or night. 

It’s the same reason he beat me in front of her and did the same to her in front of me. 

The very same day we left, Sue moved in, yet he often told her, and anyone else who would listen, how beautiful and smart my mother was, as if she were the one who got away. 

He needed Sue to feel she wasn’t good enough for him, and never would be.  For the first time in my life, I felt for Sue and realized that Trunnis’ specialty was the weaponization of disrespect. 

It was a tactic he used to bully women and children into submission. 

He knew that once he choked someone out mentally, they would lose all their fight and self-respect, which would make it easier to manipulate and dominate them. 

That’s what he was after. 

Not love. 

He craved dominance and subservience. 

It was like oxygen to him. 

He harvested souls with violence and rage. 

He wanted the people closest to him to feel wounded and empty. 

Decades later, my mother still struggles with self-respect, decision-making, and confidence. 

Trunnis’ face was red from alcohol. 

His jaw clenched with tension as he kept talking trash. 

There was no doubt that he was the bully and abuser I remembered, but not because he hated my mom or Sue, or my brother or me, but because he was a sick, twisted old man who didn’t believe he was worth anything and could not and would not help himself. 

Years later, I would learn that he had suffered abuse when he was a kid. 

His father made him stand in front of a flaming-hot coal furnace in a dark room, and after a torturous waiting period, his dad would show up with a belt and lash him, buckle- side first. 

If he moved away from the belt, he’d get burned, so he had to accept his father’s lashings and try not to move. 

He never dealt with his trauma, those memories festered into demons, and before he even knew it had happened, the victim became the abuser. 

Whenever he got drunk and the party died down, he self-soothed by picking on people weaker than him. 

He beat them up. 

He ran them down. 

Sometimes, he threatened to kill them. 

But as soon as an abusive episode was over, he would erase it from history. 

The beatings we took never happened. 

He liked to think of himself as a big man but never accepted responsibility for anything he did that went wrong, which didn’t make him any kind of a man at all. 

I suppose I was in that Denny’s booth with him because part of me was hoping Trunnis would apologize, but he didn’t think he had anything to be sorry for. 

He was straight-up delusional, and his delusions demoralized all of us. 

They were also contagious. 

For years, he made me bleed, and he made me doubt myself. 

He transferred his demons to me through the lashes of his leather belt and the open palm of his hand, and like him, I grew up believing in delusions. 

I hadn’t become an evil sociopath,  but like him, I never took responsibility for my own shortcomings or my failures. 

Sitting there listening to him rave made my blood run hot. 

Sweat beaded on my forehead and all I could think about was payback. 

It was his turn to suffer at my hands. 

I wanted to make him bleed for my pain. 

I wanted to beat that man down right there in Denny’s. 

I was hair-trigger close to allowing my father to turn me into a violent maniac just like I remembered him to be! He recognized the fire in my eyes because it was as if he were looking into a mirror, and it scared him. 

The weather changed in our booth. 

He stopped ranting mid-sentence. 

His eyes went glassy and wide, and in the fluorescent light of the diner, he looked meek and small. 

I nodded as I recognized, in that very moment, the lie that inspired my trip to Buffalo. 

I hadn’t driven all the way from Indianapolis as some first step toward self- improvement. 

No, I was there looking for a free pass. 

I went to collect more evidence that all my many failures and disappointments stemmed from the same root cause: my father, Trunnis Goggins. 

I’d been hoping that everything I’d believed all those years was true because if Trunnis was indeed the Devil in disguise, that gave me someone to blame, and I was looking for a cop-out. 

I needed Trunnis to be the flaw in my existence in order to claim the lifetime warranty on my get-out-of-jail-free card. 

Trunnis was flawed alright. 

He showed me that all over again. 

But he wasn’t my flaw. 

The second voice was right. 

Unless I took responsibility for my demons, the ones he put on me, I had no shot at becoming anything other than a perpetual loser or another miserable hustler like him. 

When the food arrived, Trunnis stuffed his face while I reflected on how much power I’d given him over the years. 

It wasn’t his fault I experienced racism or barely graduated high school. 

Yes, he beat me and my brother up and tortured my mother. 

He was a sadistic man, but I hadn’t lived with him since I was eight years old. 

When was I going to take my soul back from him? When was I going to own my own choices, my failures, my future? When would I finally accept responsibility for my life, take action, and wipe the slate clean?  Nobody said a word while I drove us back to Paradise Road. 

Trunnis watched me with a mix of drunken sadness, loss, and anger as I grabbed my car keys from the kitchen counter and walked straight out the door. 

I’d planned on spending the weekend, but I couldn’t stand to be in his presence for one minute longer. 

While the words were never spoken, I believe we both knew that would be the last time we would ever see each other. 

The funny thing was, I didn’t even hate Trunnis anymore because I finally understood him. 

On the drive back home, I turned the volume way down on the nurturing voice in my head and tuned into reality. 

In place of excuses, it was time for ownership of exactly who I’d become in all of its ugliness, and that meant acknowledging that my thin skin was definitely part of the problem. 

All of us are dealt circumstances in life we don’t have any power to control. 

Sometimes, those things are painful; occasionally, they are tragic or inhuman. 

While the Accountability Mirror—which I tagged with sticky notes filled with real talk, daily tasks, and a few bigger goals—had helped me get to a certain point, those fixes were surface-level. 

I’d never attempted to dive down and solve the root cause of my problems, so I crumbled whenever life asked me to dig deeper and persevere in order to achieve something that could lead toward sustained success. 

I’d spent my entire life in surface waters hoping that my luck would change and everything I’d dreamed of would fall into place for me. 

That night, on my drive home to Indiana, I accepted the hard truth that hoping and wishing are like gambling on long shots, and if I wanted to be better, I had to start living every day with a sense of urgency. 

Because that is the only way to turn the odds in your favor. 

Reality can be brutal when all of your excuses are stripped away and you are exposed for exactly who and what you have become, but the truth can also be liberating. 

That night, I accepted the truth about myself. 

I finally swallowed reality, and now that I had, my future was undetermined. 

Anything was possible as long as I adopted a new mindset. 

I needed to become someone who refused to give in, who simply finds a way no matter what. 

I needed to become bulletproof, a living example of resilience.  Think of a packet of seeds scattered in a garden. 

Some seeds get more sunlight, more water, and are planted in nourishing topsoil, and because they are put in the right place at the right time, they can rise from seed to seedling to a thriving tree. 

Seeds planted in too much shade or that don’t get enough water may never become anything at all unless someone transplants them—saves them—before it’s too late. 

Then there are those seedlings that look for the light on their own. 

They creep from the shade into the sunshine without being transplanted. 

They find it without anybody digging them up and placing them in the light. 

They find strength where there is none. 

That is resilience. 

Once we’re born, our natural instinct is to look for ways to thrive. 

But not everybody does, and sometimes, there’s a damn good reason for it. 

I was brought up in darkness. 

My roots were flimsy. 

I was barely tethered to rock-hard ground. 

My spirit, soul, and determination weren’t nourished in the light, but on that ride home, I realized that only I have the power to determine my future, and I had a choice to make. 

I could continue living in the Haven of Low Expectations, where it was comfortable and safe to believe that my life was not my fault or my responsibility and that my dreams were just that—fantasies that would never be because time and opportunity were not and would never be on my side. 

Or I could leave all that behind for a world of possibility, much more pain, unfathomably hard work, and zero guarantees of success. 

I could choose resilience. 

At twenty-four years old, a powerful force was gathering within me, waiting to be unleashed. 

I would soon call upon it to complete two Hell Weeks, become a member of the Navy Sea, Air, and Land (SEAL) Teams, and complete Army Ranger School. 

I’d compete in ultra races and break the world pull-up record. 

Thanks to that one night in Buffalo, New York, when I accepted my fate and became determined to tap into my resilience, I found the will to transform myself into the grittiest human being ever to find light where there was none. 

I had never been a POW like John McCain and countless others, but I lived like a prisoner in my own mind for the first twenty-four years of my life. 

Once I’d liberated myself and begun to evolve, I learned that it is the rare warrior who  embraces the adversity of being born into hell and then, with their own free will, chooses to add as much suffering as they can find to turn each day into a boot camp of resiliency. 

Those are the ones who don’t stop at good enough. 

They aren’t satisfied with just being better than they used to be. 

They are forever evolving and striving for the highest level of self. 

Eventually, I became one of them, which is why I was honored at the VFW Convention. 

*** “I’d like to thank my mom, who…” The audience gave me another round of applause as my sobs ebbed, and I returned to the present moment. 

“Who never picked me up when I fell. 

She let me pick myself up when I was knocked down.” By the time I was done speaking, all the emotion had drained clear. 

Honored and humbled to have received an award that most people would consider the crowning achievement of their career, I walked off that stage into the unknown. 

They say, “Iron sharpens iron,” but I had left the military behind, and there was no one pushing me on a day-to-day basis any longer. 

The hell with it. 

I was always destined to be that one warrior. 

Content to be the one who sharpens his sword alone.     Evolution No. 

1 I’ve worked in emergency medical services (EMS), on and off, for fifteen years. 

When an ambulance arrives on the scene of a severe trauma situation, we are immediately shotgunned into what’s known as the “golden hour.” In the vast majority of cases, sixty minutes is all the time we have to save a critically injured victim. 

The clock starts the moment the accident happens and doesn’t stop until the patient arrives at a hospital trauma center. 

By the time we get to the scene of the accident, we are already behind, which means it is vital that our assessment of each patient is rapid and on point. 

Some are identified as “Load and Go” because they need specific, time-sensitive interventions that we can’t do ourselves. 

Others are identified as “Stay and Play.” Though their condition may be dire, they have issues our skills are built to address to ensure they survive the trip to the hospital. 

One of the first things we do when we get to a patient is check their ABCs: airway, breathing, and circulation. 

We need to make sure their airway is unobstructed, their lungs are inflating, and they aren’t bleeding profusely. 

Usually, ABC issues are obvious, but every once in a while, we come across a distracting injury. 

Picture a shattered leg twisted way up over the victim’s head. 

When you see a limb in a place it does not belong, it’s easy to become fixated. 

It looks so gruesome that human instinct is to address that problem first and block everything else out. 

I’ve seen a lot of EMS personnel get sucked down that rabbit hole, but a badly broken and dislocated leg typically won’t kill anyone, unless it distracts us from realizing that their airway is also blocked or that they are gurgling because their lungs are filled with fluid and they are in danger of bleeding out internally. 

A distracting injury, in the EMS universe, is anything that entices a medical professional to forget their procedures. 

It can happen to anyone, which is why we are trained to remain alert to those distractions. 

It truly is a matter of life or death. 

The same can be said of the distracting injuries I carried. 

By the time I turned twenty-four, I was too distracted by child abuse, neglect, and racist taunts to see all of the messed-up things in my life over which I had direct influence. 

Nothing that happened to me could be considered a fatal condition on its own, yet I spent so much time worrying about what my father did to us, and felt so alone, I was refusing to live. 

And when you spend your life regretting what was or asking,  “Why me?” you eventually die having accomplished nothing at all. 

The trip to Buffalo was pure distraction. 

I wasn’t ready to put in the work to change my life, so I went on an evidence-collecting mission. 

In fact, by the time I figured it out, it was almost impossible for me to become a SEAL. 

I was so heavy that if I had been even a few pounds heavier, I would not have been able to lose the necessary weight in the allotted time. 

I had to take extreme measures—like eating two tiny meals while working out six to eight hours a day for ten weeks—but when I started to shed weight and shift my mindset, I realized I had never been as alone as I’d thought. 

I’d always told myself that nobody could possibly understand me or what I went through, but as I looked around, I noticed that there were a lot of people out there with distracting injuries stuck neck-deep in their past. 

These days, I hear from them all the time. 

Some suffered child abuse or lost a parent very young. 

Others grew up feeling ugly or stupid. 

They were bullied and beaten down or had no friends in school at all. 

It’s not always the childhood minefield that screws us up. 

There is no shortage of psychological and emotional snags in adult life. 

Every day, people suffer bankruptcy, foreclosure, divorce, and catastrophic injury. 

They get cheated or robbed by their so-called loved ones. 

They get sexually assaulted. 

They lose everything they own in a fire or flood. 

Their children die. 

It’s so easy to get lost in the fog of life. 

Tragedy hunts us all, and any event that causes suffering will linger longer than it should if you let it. 

Because our sad stories enable us to grade ourselves on a forgiving curve. 

They give us latitude and justification to stay lazy, weak-minded people, and the longer it takes for us to process that pain, the harder it is to reclaim our lives. 

Sometimes, weakness and laziness are rooted in hate and anger, and until we receive the confession, apology, or compensation we believe we are owed, we stay stuck in our self-pity as a form of self-righteous rebellion against our tormentors or even against life itself. 

Some of us become entitled. 

We think our pain entitles us to feel sorry for ourselves or that we are entitled to good fortune because we’ve survived so much. 

Of course, feeling entitled doesn’t make it so. 

Understand, the clock is always ticking, and at some point, your golden hour will expire unless you take action.  People who get lost in their past, the ones who bore their friends and family with the same tragic story over and over without showing a hint of progress, remind me of a skydiver who becomes too fixated on their tangled parachute. 

They know they have a backup ready to go but burn so much time trying to fix the primary chute that they forget to track their altimeter, and by the time they cut the first chute away and pull the second ripcord, it’s too late. 

Part of the problem is that they have become terrified of pulling that second cord because if it’s also compromised, then they truly will be helpless. 

That is a mental trap set by fear. 

We cannot afford to remain afraid of cutting away dead weight to save ourselves. 

I was that skydiver for far too long. 

My father was violent. 

My mom was broken. 

I was bullied, laughed at, and misunderstood. 

Check, check, and checkmate. 

And yet, I was breathing free, and I was not bleeding. 

Physically, I was alive and well and perfectly capable of cutting all of that garbage away. 

I’d wasted way too much of my life telling myself the same sad story. 

I needed to move forward. 

It was time to write something new. 

If an act of God or nature tore your life apart, the good news is that you really have nobody to blame. 

Yet, the randomness of it all can feel so personal, as if you’ve been marked for doom by the fates. 

If you feel wronged by somebody else, you may be waiting on a confession or an apology in order to move forward, but I’m sorry to say the apology—that tearful confession you’ve been dreaming of—will never come. 

The good news is you don’t need anybody else to free you from your trauma. 

You can do it on your own. 

My father never apologized to me. 

Nobody ever said sorry for anything I went through. 

I had to come to the conclusion that while I didn’t deserve any of it, I was my main problem and primary obstacle. 

I’d given Trunnis Goggins all of my power. 

I had to take it back. 

I had to diffuse my demon. 

I had to shrink him down to the lowly, pathetic figure he was by humanizing him. 

Just as there was no other way to come out of the gauntlet that was my childhood except screwed up, I had to see that he was a mortally flawed piece of crap because of what he went through. 

Once I understood that, it was up to me to either do the hard work to break that cycle or stay cursed. 

Like medics on the scene of a car accident, we all must act with a sense of urgency and tune into that ticking clock in the back of our minds. 

Because there is a drop- dead time on everything we do in life. 

All our dreams and visions come with expiration dates etched in invisible ink. 

Windows of opportunity can and do close,  so it is imperative that we do not waste time on foolishness. 

None of us have any clue what’s coming for us or when our time might run out, which is why I do my best to ignore anything that is counterproductive. 

I’m not suggesting we act like robots, but we need to understand that forward motion gives our lives momentum. 

We need to remember that sometimes chaos will descend and a clear highway can be wiped out by a flash flood in the blink of an eye. 

When that happens, a lot of people look for a cozy place to hunker down and hide out until the storm passes. 

“I’m only human,” they say. 

When chaos rains down upon them and they feel drained and powerless, they cannot conceive of a way to keep going. 

I understand that impulse, but if I had succumbed to the “I’m only human” mentality, I never would have dug myself out of the deep hole I was in at twenty-four years old. 

Because the second you utter those words, the white towel is fluttering in the air, and your mind stops looking for more fuel. 

I didn’t know for sure if I’d ever find my way out of the darkness. 

I just knew that I could not throw in the towel, and neither can you. 

Because there is no towel in our corner. 

There is only water and a cut man. 

And if those are your only options, you have no choice but to keep fighting until you overcome every last thing that once held you back. 

You have been preoccupied for way too long. 

It’s time to switch your focus to the things that will slingshot you forward. 

#DistractingInjuries #NeverFinished Chapter Two    2. 

Merry Christmas On the day after Christmas 2018, Kish and I had breakfast with my brother, Trunnis Jr., my mother, and my niece Alexis at the aptly named Loveless Café in Nashville. 

It was the perfect place for a Goggins family breakfast, considering our history with the so-called happiest time of the year. 

Growing up, my friends made such a big deal about Christmas. 

They talked about it and their wish lists for weeks ahead of time. 

They watched the same old Christmas movies and sang the same corny songs. 

To me, it was just another day on the calendar, no different than the rest, because of how I came up. 

In Buffalo, Christmas was a marketing opportunity for my father. 

While most kids were playing with their new toys and slipping into fresh gear, we were scraping gum off the skating-rink floors, then polishing them and prepping the building for an all-night skate. 

Once we escaped to Indiana, my mom was so shell-shocked that she couldn’t have cared less about any holidays. 

Consumed with finding work, a place to live, and having a social life of her own, Christmas—and my experience of it—did not register on her priority list. 

It had been three years since I’d last seen and communicated with my brother, in the days after his eldest daughter was killed. 

We’ve always had an awkward relationship because our perspectives on our childhood are so different. 

When my dad was abusing us, my brother always attempted to be a peacemaker, and that required him to make excuses for our father no matter how vicious he was. 

He wanted everything to be kumbaya. 

When our dad came after our mother, Trunnis Jr. 

made it a point to escape to his room, while I made sure to watch. 

I saw things as they really were, and that made me a fighter. 

Trunnis Jr. 

remembers things as he wished they had been. 

I’ve never blamed him for it. 

We were all doing our best to survive somehow. 

My mom couldn’t protect either of us. 

She was beaten just as badly as we were. 

It was as if there were four different versions of the same reality show streaming from the same house all at once. 

The dissonance was impossible not to feel and absorb. 

When I was nine years old, my brother chose to leave us and our new life in Indiana to live with our father, and we were never close after that. 

However, he will always be my only brother, so when I heard Kayla had been killed, I dropped everything to be with him. 

I will always care about him, and I admire him for  surviving our childhood to become an amazing father and earn his PhD. 

Still, we share too much history and experienced it too differently for it to be anything but awkward when we get together. 

So, when he told me what he had planned after breakfast, I wasn’t the least bit surprised. 

“We’re driving to Buffalo,” he said with a grin, “to show the kids around and pay our respects to the old man.” I glanced at my mother, who would be accompanying him and his family on their trip down memory lane. 

She couldn’t look me in the eye. 

Although she and I don’t always remember every little thing the same way either, we know we survived hell. 

Like any good revisionist historian, Trunnis Jr. 

is still trying to convince himself otherwise. 

Which is why Buffalo remains his favorite city. 

He makes the trip as often as possible, and whenever he does, he visits the grave of our tormentor. 

For survivors of trauma, denial is a tantalizing numbing agent. 

It allows you to rewrite your past and sell yourself some fiction. 

In my brother’s tale, Buffalo was a happy place, and our father was a pillar of the community. 

When we were kids, he forgave our father quicker than a priest in a confessional, and as an adult, his selective memory gives his childhood a brighter sheen, which makes him feel less damaged. 

But whether he wants to acknowledge it or not, damage was done. 

If he had experienced things the way my mom and I had, he wouldn’t subject her to a stroll through his personal fantasyland, as if Buffalo weren’t the torture chamber she’d had to escape many years ago. 

By 2018, I’d mastered my childhood demons. 

I was the puppeteer, and all the skeletons in my closet were on strings I controlled. 

My mother didn’t deny what had happened to us either, but like my brother, she preferred to avoid her pain. 

She hated discussing her experience with my father or even thinking about it, and later, when she described that trip back to Buffalo with Trunnis Jr., she said that she’d felt dazed. 

Everything looked unfamiliar. 

Even the house on Paradise Road. 

She didn’t recognize a single building or street name. 

It was as if her memory had been wiped like a hard drive, and she was seeing it all—the house, Skateland, all of her old familiar haunts—for the first time. 

Trauma will do that. 

It redacts places, names, and incidents if you don’t do the hard work to process the difficult times. 

If, like my brother, you stash it away in the way back of your mind—deep enough that it becomes impossible to reach—or, like my mom, try to ignore it because it’s too much to confront, one day, it won’t just be the bad memories that are repressed. 

Entire chunks of your life will have slipped through your fingers.  My mother could have gone to Buffalo with a game plan. 

It should have been her victory lap. 

When we left, Trunnis told her that she’d become a prostitute and I’d become a gangster. 

Instead, she became a Senior Associate Vice President at a medical college in Nashville making six figures. 

Trunnis Jr. 

is a college professor and family man. 

I’m a Retired Navy SEAL who had just been honored by the VFW and was the author of a new book. 

But she didn’t go to Trunnis’ grave to tell him any of that. 

She floated above the moment in a bubble she’d built to survive another weekend in Buffalo, New York. 

Like most of us, she didn’t want to feel her pain, so she failed to find the power in it. 

A lot of us are trapped in our own brains, shackled by long-gone demons who might even be dead. 

We refuse to discuss or acknowledge what happened, so when we overcome it all, we fail to recognize it or even feel it. 

My mom left Buffalo a shell of herself and became a successful, professional woman, but she was still cowering before the demon that stole her soul. 

She should have written Trunnis a letter telling him what he’d missed and who he’d unleashed. 

She should have read it out loud to him at his grave. 

Not so he knew what she’d become, but so she knew it! She needed to take her soul back and introduce herself to herself! Denial is self-protecting, but it’s also self-limiting. 

Accepting your full truth, including all your faults, imperfections, and missteps, allows you to evolve, expand your possibilities, seek redemption, and explore your true potential. 

And until you unpack your baggage, it will be impossible to know what your potential really is. 

The whole truth can’t haunt you if it serves you. 

Kish and I were scheduled to fly to Florida that night to celebrate a belated Christmas with her tight-knit family. 

Christmas had always been a big deal to Kish, and though a cozy holiday house sounded soft as hell to me, she’s the greatest woman I’ve ever met. 

We’d become partners in life and in business, and I wanted her to be happy. 

If that meant a trip to Norman Rockwell’s Florida Christmas, so be it. 

But there weren’t gonna be any matching pajama pictures, I promise you that! We had several hours before the flight, and Kish spent them digging into the sales numbers for my first book, Can’t Hurt Me. 

It had been out for less than a month and already sold more copies than I ever imagined possible. 

After more than five years and multiple setbacks, the book I’d envisioned was finally out in the world, and it was a hit.  While some people may not be surprised by the book’s success, there are countless others who most definitely are. 

Prior iterations of the book proposal had been passed on and turned down by numerous publishing houses that didn’t see the value in my story. 

Case in point: in 2016, I presented a one-hundred-plus-page book proposal to Ed Victor. 

He was a legend in the literary world and was introduced to me by none other than Marcus Luttrell, who had worked with him on his bestselling book Lone Survivor. 

Ed also repped rock stars, like Eric Clapton and Keith Richards, and some of the biggest novelists in the game. 

He was once quoted as having grown up “…perceiving life as a long highway littered with green lights.” In a different article, he mentioned that the criteria he used to determine the publishing potential of a given project boiled down to three questions. 

“Is the person fabulous? Is the work good? And is there a lot of money in it?” My book proposal did not pass that particular evaluation. 

But I give him credit. 

He didn’t sugarcoat the bad news in his rejection email. 

From: Ed Victor Date: June 27, 2016, 6:46:16 AM PDT To: David Cc: Jennifer Kish Subject: Your book Dear David I said I would get back to you on Monday, so here I am…but you are not going to like what I have to say.  …my assessment of its value—and its sales potential—are in no way aligned with yours. 

I could be wrong—I certainly have been in the past!—but I don’t see this as a book that will command a big advance and sell large amounts of copies… When I told you I would be honest in my reaction to this project, you warned me that, if I said No, I’d then see it high up on the NY Times Bestseller List and deeply regret my decision. 

You may well be right, but because my assessment of the value and commercial prospects of the book are so far below yours, I would not be the right agent for it. 

You need someone with 101% enthusiasm who will go out and prove me hopelessly wrong (not for the first time). 

… All best Ed PS I will tell Marcus about my decision, since it was he who tried to bring us together. 

It shouldn’t have surprised me that the guy who grew up with nothing but green lights couldn’t relate to a life stifled by red lights, potholes, and stop signs, but he was the industry expert and didn’t see my story as accessible. 

That was a problem, and it was discouraging in the moment, but it didn’t make me angry, and I never second-guessed my own value. 

I knew that my life, my story, and my approach were non-traditional. 

Their cookie cutter didn’t work on me. 

I couldn’t be boxed and packaged to industry standards. 

Roger that. 

When had I ever been the perfect fit for anything at all? Never. 

But I still managed to find success.  What Ed Victor saw as a disadvantage—the fact that I couldn’t be easily defined and sold—was actually my greatest asset. 

My approach, background, and accomplishments all proved one thing: I am the ultimate underdog. 

That’s been the truth my whole life, and if no one could see my potential, it would be up to me to show them what they missed. 

There are libraries packed with books on how to be happy and the power of positivity, but nobody prepares you for the dark ages, and the power of my story was in my grind through tough times to become the one person inspiring you to never be satisfied. 

Ed and all the other industry experts I’d met weren’t interested in that because they didn’t get it. 

That didn’t mean that the book wouldn’t sell. 

It just meant I had to double down on what made me unique, maintain faith in myself and my vision, and work harder. 

In 2017, I signed with a new literary agent and put together another proposal that earned me a $300,000 advance from a major publishing house. 

That’s good money, but while I waited for the contract to come through, I became conflicted. 

Was I ready to sell my story to someone else? Did I want or even need an editor to help me tell it? I was the only one who knew how much blood I’d shed and how many times I’d been baptized in sweat to get me to this point. 

There were too many all-nighters and pre-dawn wake-up calls to count. 

I’d been knocked down hundreds of times. 

I’d pushed my mind, body, and soul to the very edge. 

Like Andy Dufresne in Shawshank Redemption, I’d spent more than twenty years scraping away at the prison wall of my mind with a blunt hammer, and I needed the final say when it came to the edits and who made money off of my story. 

After many days and nights of turning it over in my head, I realized the only way to ensure that was to publish the book myself. 

Once I killed the deal, my agent cussed me out. 

He told me I was off his client roster and that I would be lucky to sell ten thousand copies. 

Basically, he said, “Merry Christmas, Goggins,” and cut me loose. 

He wasn’t alone. 

Almost everybody I turned to for advice—people who knew how the industry worked and what it took to succeed—said I was a fool.  So be it. 

You cannot be afraid to disappoint people. 

You have to live the life you want to live. 

Sometimes, that means being the person who can stand alone in a crowded room and be totally comfortable with that. 

Now, does that mean you won’t be nervous or that it will all go smoothly? Hell no. 

When you’re on the ramp of a C-130 at twenty thousand feet, it’s okay if your knees start to buckle because you know time is short and freefall is imminent, but the second you leap from the aircraft, you must commit to the jump. 

If you don’t, you will flop around, dangerously out of control, and fall too fast. 

You need to commit in order to focus on keeping a stable body position. 

And never look down. 

Focus on the horizon. 

That is your perspective. 

That is your future. 

Instead of receiving a big advance, I spent 90 percent of my life savings—more than the advance I would have received—to put out a book of the same quality as anything the major publishers release, and I produced my own audiobook with an entirely new spin. 

It was risky, but trailblazers never take the smooth roads thousands of others have already traveled. 

They go cross-country and dig their own path forward. 

I’d been outside the box my whole life. 

I’d been smashing cookie cutters for nearly two decades, and this was the biggest bet I’d ever made on myself. 

“You’re on the New York Times Best Seller list,” Kish said. 

She looked up from her laptop and flashed a smile. 

She was proud, and I was too. 

Not because I cared about the New York Times Best Seller list, or even that it was selling at all, but because I knew the book was an honest reflection of my life and all I put into it. 

And, admittedly, after being told that making any best seller list was “absolutely not going to happen” and “impossible” for a self-published book by a first-time author, it was satisfying to defy the odds one more time. 

I was borderline illiterate in fifth grade. 

That night, I imagined sitting down with that eleven-year-old kid who struggled so much in class and was so hungry for acceptance. 

If I told him that one day he would become a bestselling author, he’d have laughed in my face.  I shook my head, chuckled to myself, and swallowed a handful of vitamins. 

Without warning, my heart began to race. 

I put two fingers to my carotid and checked my watch. 

My pulse shot from a steady fifty beats per minute to 150 beats per minute and back again without any set rhythm. 

As an EMT and someone who had recovered from multiple heart surgeries, I knew right away that I was in atrial fibrillation, or AFib, which is when the upper chambers of the heart, the atria, are out of rhythm with the lower chambers, the ventricles. 

I’d experienced a similar episode nine years earlier after my first heart surgery when one of the patches failed. 

Did another patch fail, or was this something new? I didn’t tell Kish right away. 

She’d worked for months without a break to help turn Can’t Hurt Me into a hit, and she couldn’t wait to go home and be with her family. 

Instead, I tried to control my heart rate through vagal maneuvers, like equalizing the pressure in my sinuses with the Valsalva technique and squeezing my knees into my chest, forcing a gag or a cough, and massaging the carotid sinus. 

Those techniques had been proven to reset the pressure in the body and click the heart back into rhythm. 

Deep breathing can help too, but nothing worked, and the longer it went on, the dizzier I became and the graver the danger. 

AFib can turn blood clots into embolisms that block blood vessels in the brain or heart, causing strokes and heart failure. 

People with sickle cell trait, like me, are at a higher risk for blood clots. 

Hours passed. 

I pretended everything was cool while my pulse sketched a dire electrocardiogram in my mind’s eye, but when Kish zipped her suitcase and turned to me, ready to roll to Florida, she could see something was very wrong. 

We weren’t headed to the airport. 

We were going to the emergency room. 

The day after Christmas is dead in most public places, but holiday season in the ER is always bumping. 

Maybe it’s the alcohol, the family strife, the loneliness, or a combination of all three. 

When I was fourteen years old, my mother’s fiancé, Wilmoth, was shot and killed the day after Christmas, which is why whenever the calendar leans into late December, I think more about trauma than Santa.  The ER was packed when we walked through the sliding glass doors. 

I slumped into one of the few spare seats in the waiting room, dizzy as hell. 

Medics, doctors, and nurses blurred as they hustled between treatment areas, wheeling patients around the squeaky tiled floors on gurneys and in wobbly old wheelchairs. 

The PA system crackled. 

Fluorescent lights buzzed overhead. 

Kish sat beside me and filled out paperwork as I closed my eyes and took yet another deep breath. 

Minutes later, or maybe it was hours, I did the same thing in front of a young doctor in a curtained-off treatment area. 

He wasn’t a cardiologist, and when I explained I’d had two heart surgeries, he took the news a bit too casually. 

He listened to my heartbeat, tagged me up with sensors, and watched my pulse scratch out a rhythm on his ECG monitor. 

Then, he told me what I’d just told him. 

“You’re in AFib.” “Roger that.” I shot him some side eye. 

Kish caught it. 

“What can you do for him, doctor?” she asked. 

“We’re going to put you on a drip and see how you respond.” A nurse came in and tapped my vein, and the meds seemed to work. 

Within minutes, my pulse relaxed and my dizziness eased, but when the doc strolled back in an hour later, he looked confused as he read the monitors. 

“Well, your pulse has calmed down, but you’re still in AFib,” he said. 

“I’m going to call a cardiologist upstairs and see what we can do here.”  I didn’t need to hear what the cardiologist had to say to know my fate. 

I’d studied AFib cases, and if breathing techniques, equalization, and meds don’t sync the chambers, the next step is to shock the heart, to restart it like you would a frozen computer. 

I’d seen videos of it, and I was terrified. 

It’s funny, my two heart surgeries never scared me. 

I knew death was a risk with both of them, but my mortality didn’t register at all back then, and I greeted them with a shoulder shrug. 

That night in Nashville, I felt differently about life and death. 

Can’t Hurt Me had changed me, and my latest metamorphosis ran much deeper than commercial success and the public’s enthusiasm for my story. 

Writing that book allowed me to process the horror I’d gone through one last time, and publishing it myself gave me a clean slate. 

People had always assumed a lot of things about me. 

Can’t Hurt Me finally allowed me to speak my truth, and I felt vindicated. 

I could finally be at peace with my life and all that I put into it and accomplished. 

Then, right on cue, my heart skipped like a scratched record and there I was, back in life’s crosshairs. 

Merry Christmas, indeed! While Kish called her parents and wiped away tears, I confronted a bitter possibility. 

I believed my role on this earth was to suffer and overcome so I could teach others how to do the same, but now that that period of my life appeared to be over, I had to wonder: was I suddenly expendable? My self-talk flip-flopped between feeling sorry for myself and being royally pissed. 

My anxiety was off the charts. 

I was not sneering at death like back in the day. 

I was afraid. 

Desperate for more life. 

A technician arrived and shaved my chest. 

She put one electrode on my chest and another on my back. 

Then, the doctor strolled in and asked Kish to grab a seat in the waiting room out front. 

He read the monitors, glanced over at me, and hit the switch. 

Two hundred joules flowed through me, and everything went blank. 

For a fraction of a second, I was suspended between heartbeats. 

He hit me again, and I screamed as I came to. 

Kish heard me take the Lord’s name in vain all the way in the waiting room, something I never do. 

That’s how much it hurt. 

But it worked. 

I  was synced.  Trying to control the fear of being shocked The doctor sent me home with a normal pulse, a battery of tests to be scheduled to make sure there was nothing structurally wrong with my heart, and a tweaked-out soul. 

This is how life works. 

One second, you are talking about the New York Times Best Seller list, and the next, you run the risk of not being able to live to see tomorrow. 

It literally happens that quickly. 

Nothing is permanent. 

Life is the ultimate competitor. 

It takes no days off, and it won’t care if you’ve made some money or got a promotion at work. 

All that means is you are good to go for a moment or two. 

No matter how tough and successful you think you are, trust me, there is a semi coming around a blind curve, ready to smack you in the mouth when you are comfortable as all hell. 

I knew that, but I also thought my heart issues were in the rearview mirror. 

Now, I could see how ridiculous that was. 

When you are always in the grind, you think there will come a time when the rough road, blitzed with potholes and littered with blown tires, will smooth out, but that is never the case. 

In fact, if you go through life expecting that smooth road, you won’t be prepared when a pothole opens up on freshly laid blacktop and rocks you sideways one warm and pleasant evening. 

That’s what Merry Christmas means in Gogglish. 

It has nothing to do with the  holiday. 

It’s about the surprise “gifts” life has wrapped up, just waiting for you to stumble into. 

Which is another way of saying I lost something essential in that emergency room. 

As dawn broke on the drive home, I felt like Samson running around bald in the hamster wheel of my mind. 

I didn’t know who I was anymore. 

Was I still a savage, or was I just another squawking head? Some people might be put off by the term, but to me, calling someone a “savage” is the highest compliment. 

A savage is an individual who defies odds, who has a will that cannot be tamed, and who, when knocked down, will always get back up! If the doctors told me that I had to stop running and working out hard in the gym, I would cancel everything. 

I’d pull the plug on all future speaking engagements and on my social media channels. 

I’ve always been a man of action and service, and I know I would not be able to inspire people by simply talking about the things I did in my past. 

I gave myself one rule before joining social media: if I can’t live it, I won’t speak it. 

Before I bedded down that night, I decided that if my body wouldn’t cooperate anymore, Can’t Hurt Me would be my swan song, and I would disappear.     Evolution No. 

2 Never waste a single thing. 

It was a lesson I first learned in Brazil, Indiana, when a classmate brought me a gift after school. 

I didn’t get a lot of presents growing up, so when he handed me that one, I was a thirsty little kid. 

I wanted to tear that package open and see what I got. 

The first loud rip got my grandfather’s attention. 

He poked his head into the room and surveyed the scene. 

“Calm down,” he said. 

Then, he handed me a pair of scissors. 

“That’s good wrapping paper. 

We can reuse that.” A lot of us grew up with grandparents seasoned by the Great Depression, who knew we were working with finite resources. 

Even those who made a nice living didn’t take comfort or plenty for granted, and I guess that rubbed off on me. 

To this day, I abhor waste. 

I eat all my leftovers, and when my tube of toothpaste flattens out, I don’t just roll it up to squeeze out the remainder, I cut that tube open and put it in a Ziploc baggie until I’ve used every last drop. 

Everything must be utilized. 

Especially the energy in volatile, potentially damaging emotions like fear and hate. 

You have to learn how to handle them—how to mine them—and once you master that craft, any negative emotion or event that bubbles up in your brain or gets lobbed your way, like a grenade, can be used as fuel to make you better. 

But to get there, you must literally listen to yourself. 

In 2009, I was training to ride in a three-thousand-mile cycling race called the Race Across America, better known as RAAM. 

I was still full-time in the military, so I had to wake up extra early to fit in my fifty- to one hundred-mile rides before work. 

My weekend training rides stretched out over two hundred miles—sometimes I rode upwards of five hundred miles—often on the narrow shoulders of busy highways. 

I did all that because the RAAM’s distance scared me. 

The monotony of being able to stay locked in on a bicycle for days at a time without sleep freaked me out. 

The race burrowed so deep into my psyche that I wasn’t sleeping well. 

To demystify the experience, I made a point of chronicling each ride on a handheld tape recorder. 

I described everything I saw and felt in granular detail.  It was mostly just me on a bike with cars, Harleys, and semis zooming past. 

I smelled all the exhaust, felt the wind slap me upside the head, and tasted the grit of the open road. 

When I veered onto the blue roads, I wouldn’t see a single car for fifty miles, but that white line was ever-present. 

Whether the shoulder was wide, thin, or nonexistent, the white line was always there. 

I listened to those tapes at night and visualized the white line a thousand times. 

I became entranced by the simplicity of it, which helped minimize everything else about the race. 

And though I didn’t enter RAAM that year because of emergency heart surgery, I knew I’d stumbled onto a system to minimize my fears and build confidence that I’d use for years to come.  I can’t possibly fathom the hours spent alone riding the white line When I started speaking to Fortune 500 companies and professional ballclubs for a living, I had to be willing to reveal my brutal life story to successful people— including millionaires and billionaires who had heard it all. 

This wasn’t some  simple recruiting trip to a high school where students were easily impressed, and all my anxiety around public speaking resurfaced. 

Once again, I broke out the tape recorder. 

I spoke my fears and my trauma—which not that many people knew about—into that microphone and discovered a strange, unexpected alchemy. 

My fear and trauma were transformed into energy and confidence. 

Many people write out their darkest moments in a journal or diary and hope to gain some leverage on whatever it is they survived or are struggling to overcome. 

I’ve kept a journal for years, but there are levels to this, and a written archive is the entry level. 

Audio recordings are more interactive and accessible and have a more profound effect on the mind. 

If you were bullied, abused, or sexually assaulted and are willing to speak the unfiltered truth into the microphone and listen to it over and over, after a period of time, it will become just another story. 

A powerful story, for sure, but the poison will be neutralized, and the power will be yours. 

This is not a task to take lightly. 

If you’ve survived acute trauma, you don’t want to think about what you were doing on the day it happened, what you heard and how you felt, or how your life capsized afterward. 

Do it anyway. 

The more color and context you can add to the track, the sooner you will walk the streets with your headphones on and your head held high. 

When people see you coming, they might think you’re listening to an Eminem jam. 

But no, it’s your deepest trauma, the scene of your supposed destruction, on repeat. 

With each subsequent listen, you will claim more and more power and gain enough transformational energy to change your life. 

Most people don’t even want to think about their darkest moments, much less talk about it. 

They refuse to speculate in the harsh wilderness of their past because they are afraid of exposure. 

Believe me, there’s gold in them there hills. 

I know because I was the Black dude in the cowboy hat, hip deep in the icy stream panning for nuggets. 

And if you find the courage to paint the picture of your worst nightmare in the spoken word, then listen to it until it soaks in and saturates your mind, until you can hear it without any emotional reaction or spillover, it will no longer make you cower or cry. 

It will make you strong. 

Strong enough to walk out on stage and tell the whole world what they did to you, and how it didn’t break you. 

It made you powerful.  Recording yourself isn’t just a reliable tool for neutralizing trauma. 

It can change the dynamic of almost any situation or mood. 

If you use it properly, it can also keep you honest. 

One day a couple of years ago, not long after ramping up my training from ten miles of running per day to twenty or more, I felt drained and sore, too tired to run, and kept telling myself that I needed a day off. 

As I relaxed on the couch, I tuned into my self-talk. 

Then, I grabbed my recorder and whined into the microphone. 

I wanted to hear how it sounded out loud. 

I was real with myself. 

I cataloged my recent runs and nagging injuries and described how I thought a day off might help me. 

I made a solid case for a much-needed rest day, but when I played it back, the jury of one was unconvinced. 

Because my inner crybaby was suddenly the emperor with no clothes. 

Buck naked in the light of day, he was impossible to ignore and even harder to stomach. 

I was off the couch and out on the road in a matter of seconds. 

Many people wake up with dread or doubt day after day. 

They dread their workouts, their class load, or their job. 

Maybe they have a test or presentation that makes them nervous, or they know that the day’s workout will hurt. 

While they linger in bed, they tune into their soft, forgiving self-talk, which doesn’t make it any easier to get up and moving. 

Most people rise up eventually, but they remain in a daze for hours because they aren’t fully engaged with their lives. 

Their self-talk has made them numb to the moment, and they sleepwalk through half the day before they finally perk up. 

The way we speak to ourselves in moments of doubt is crucial, whether or not the stakes are high. 

Because our words become actions, and our actions build habits that can coat our minds and bodies with the plaque of ambivalence, hesitancy, and passivity and separate us from our own lives. 

If any of this sounds familiar, grab your phone and record your inner dialogue as soon as you wake up. 

Don’t hold back. 

Spill all your dread, laziness, and stress into the mic. 

Now listen to it. 

Nine times out of ten, you won’t like what you hear. 

It will make you cringe. 

You wouldn’t want your girlfriend or boyfriend, your boss, or your kids to hear your unfiltered weakness. 

But you should. 

Because then you can repurpose it. 

You can use it to remind yourself that changes must be made. 

Listening might inspire you to commit to your life in a deeper way, to be your best at work, at school, or in the gym. 

It can challenge you to rewrite the narrative so that when you bed down, you won’t feel like you wasted another valuable day.  Do it again the next morning, but this time, once you get through listening to all your whining about what you don’t want to do, sit up in bed and lay down a second take. 

Pretend you’re motivating a friend or loved one who is going through challenges. 

Be respectful of the issues they face, but be positive, forceful, and realistic too. 

This is a skill that demands repetition, and if you do it regularly, you’ll find that it won’t take long for your self-talk to flip from doubt and dread to optimism and empowerment. 

The conditions of your life might not change a whole lot at first, but your words will make sure that your approach does change, and that will eventually enable you to shift everything. 

But you must speak the truth and be willing to listen to it. 

Don’t be afraid of your weakness or doubt. 

Don’t be embarrassed and pretend it doesn’t exist. 

It surfaced for a reason, so use it to flip the dynamic of your life. 

Lately, I’ve used this technique with the hate that comes at me online. 

Most people in my position don’t read negative comments or emails. 

They have someone else screen and then erase them. 

I see hate as just another fuel source. 

I see the beauty and power in it, and I never let it go to waste. 

When the negative comments come in, and they always do, I capture them in a screenshot and speak them into my microphone. 

In 2021, I posted an image of my swollen left knee, which inspired a flood of negative comments. 

Some claimed to have seen my breakdown coming and counted it as a personal win. 

Others simply liked seeing me in pain. 

“I’m tired of hearing you run your mouth,” one of them wrote. 

“I hope I never see your Black butt run again,” wrote another. 

They were trying to salt my wounds. 

They wanted me to feel the sting, which I did, and hoped it would bring me down even further. 

It didn’t. 

I loved those comments. 

I loved them so much I made a mixtape. 

I printed them all out, recorded myself saying each one, and then I looped it. 

Whenever I have a bad day, I listen to it. 

Sometimes, I walk around the house savoring it in full stereo. 

Most people only mine the positive stuff. 

They want everything and everyone to be nice and hunky-dory. 

They get filled up on sweetness and recoil from the dark, bitter pill of hate. 

But there’s not nearly as much fuel in atta’ boys and accolades as there is in hate. 

Luckily, the world is filled with jealous, insecure haters. 

If you  don’t get negative comments on social media, find your fuel in the thoughtless comment of a friend or the doubt of a teacher or coach. 

I’m sure it stings when you feel slighted, underestimated, criticized, or excluded. 

Just know that the heat you feel is free energy waiting to be burned. 

Don’t crawl up in a corner worried about the people who disrespect you. 

Repackage what you’re hearing and feeling until it works for you! That is a winner’s mentality. 

Winners in life see everything they experience and everything they hear, see, and feel as pure energy. 

They train their minds to find it. 

They drop into the gnarly crevices to mine golden nuggets of trauma, doubt, and hate. 

They do not live disposable, single-use lives. 

They discard nothing and refurbish everything. 

They find strength in the bullying and heartbreak, in their defeats and failures. 

They harvest it from the people who hate them personally and from the online trolls too. 

Some people go to sleep with a meditation app. 

Others open the windows to the night sounds or stream white noise, whale songs, or the lullaby of the sea lapping some lonely shore. 

When I bed down at night, I listen to my haters. 

And it’s obvious those weak cowards don’t have the slightest idea who they are dealing with. 

I’m the person who turns their every negative word into my positive progress. 

I take what they serve me, roll it up in that wrapping paper I saved way back when, and give it right back to them in the form of another work-out, another long run, and another year of leveling up. 

Honestly, I should thank them. 

They make me stronger and more determined to achieve my goals. 

Which only makes them hate me even more. 

It’s time to make your own mixtape. 

#TapeRecordYourself #NeverFinished Chapter Three    3. 

The Mental Lab Five weeks after Christmas, it had become obvious that my whole life had changed. 

The unexpected attention and notoriety that came with and followed the release of Can’t Hurt Me was as humbling as it was disorienting. 

After decades of grinding in the shadows outside the public eye, I was now spotlit. 

I’d always felt most at home in the margins. 

During my military career, I’d go on my longest runs and rucks before anyone else woke up. 

While others were relaxing or partying after a hard day or week of work, I stayed in to study my dive tables, pack and repack my parachute, or run and grind in the gym deep into the night. 

Everything I did on my own time was for my own personal fulfillment and growth. 

I sure didn’t do it for attention. 

Yet, I was often misunderstood. 

I was carrying a boulder as big as the world on my back, just trying to get to the other side of the darkness that was chasing me down. 

I was terrified that if I stopped getting better, if I gave myself a break from any of it, all my insecurities and innate laziness would get the drop on me again. 

Anytime I felt physically exhausted or mentally zapped, I pictured my twenty-four-year-old fat self glaring at me with a big smile on his face. 

A smile that said, “I’m still here, loser. 

I am who you really are, and I’m not going anywhere.” I looked at each day as an opportunity to mine the negativity that had colonized my brain and became fascinated by the power of the mind and how it can work for us and against us. 

Often, it falls prey to the merry-go-round of emotions and situational conditions that cause confusion and sap us of focus, force, and fortitude, all of which have a natural tendency to ebb and flow like the tide. 

My early years made me very aware of this inherent fragility we all have, but later on, I learned how to harness and channel all my mental horsepower to accomplish things I never thought possible for myself. 

And I did it by building what I now refer to as my Mental Lab. 

Construction began after my last trip to Buffalo. 

That’s when I finally stopped complaining long enough to realize the training ground that I needed was all around me. 

My messed-up life was the raw material I was looking for, and if I paid close  attention to my impulses, insecurities, and actions, dropped the shame, and remained willing to dissect my self-doubt, anxiety, and fear, I would find the strength and motivation to transform my life. 

Soon enough, I found myself hitting the books hard to prepare for the ASVAB test and spending six to eight hours in the gym or on the trails every day to qualify for Navy SEAL training. 

And it didn’t take long to realize that, like life itself, difficult workouts and long study sessions tended to spotlight all my weak points. 

My desire to continue to eat crappy food, my natural impulse to cut corners in almost everything I did, my general lack of drive, and my flagging attention during those marathon ASVAB study sessions revealed my willingness to settle for mediocrity. 

But what came up for me most often was my failure in Pararescue training. 

It was my constant companion during those weeks. 

It shadowed me wherever I went. 

I’d arrived at Air Force boot camp in the best shape of my life, and by the time Pararescue training began eight weeks later, I was in peak physical condition. 

I’d read the warning order front to back and prepared for each and every timed physical evolution, assuming my strength and speed would be enough. 

But I lacked the mental strength to see it through, and after a terrifying pool evolution, my fear of the water held me hostage until I quit. 

The more I dissected that situation, the more I realized how much I needed this new Mental Lab. 

Being that I was almost three hundred pounds and had to lose more than one hundred in less than three months, I knew it wasn’t possible to report to Naval Special Warfare Command in Coronado in the best physical shape of my life. 

But that wasn’t necessary. 

My root problems were not and never had been physical. 

They were all mental. 

In my Lab, each physical workout became a test of my mental fortitude. 

I stopped caring about how my body looked. 

You don’t need six-pack abs when your mind is steel-plated. 

From that point on, each run, every hour on the pull-up bar, and all my late-night study sessions became experiments conducted to see how long my mind would hold out when I continued to apply more and more pressure. 

I was creating a man who was mentally prepared to do anything it took to become a SEAL. 

Even if it meant experiencing three Hell Weeks and running on broken legs.  Those same experiments continued for the next twenty years, and through all my countless trials, tumbles, and failures, I cultivated an alter-ego—a savage who refused to quit under almost any circumstance. 

Someone capable of overcoming any and all obstacles. 

I felt compelled to share what I learned in the lab because I knew it could help people, and what started as a slow reveal of my inner drive on social media swelled to a deep confession in Can’t Hurt Me. 

Anybody who tuned in or turned the page knew exactly where I came from and what drives me. 

But one thing I never shared was that there were two sides to my psyche and soul. 

If you don’t feel like you’re good enough, if your life lacks meaning and time feels like it’s slipping through your fingers, there is only one option. 

Recreate yourself in your own Mental Lab. 

Somewhere you can be alone with your thoughts and wrestle with the substance of what and who you want to be in your one short life on earth. 

If it feels right, create an alter ego to access some of that dark matter in your own mind. 

That’s what I did. 

In my mind, David Goggins wasn’t the savage who accomplished all the hard things. 

It was Goggins who did that. 

David was the kid born with one eye closed and raised scared and shackled. 

There is nothing inherently special about me. 

I just stopped focusing on what was holding me back and learned to use rejection, pain, and failure as tools to harness every available bit of dark matter in my mind—all my unused strength, passion, and desire. 

It was rarely fun. 

I suffered way more than I smiled, but it helped me create my alter ego. 

Goggins was powered by the dark side of my soul that refused to be denied, and he had one goal: to become the hardest person to ever live! We all have a Mental Lab at our disposal, but most people don’t even know that they have access to a place where they can transform themselves. 

Therefore, they remain locked out. 

By the time they hit mid-life, the doors are wrapped with a rusty chain and deadbolted. 

The equipment inside is dusty and broken. 

Weeds are sprouting from the foundation and the roof. 

For two decades, the doors to my Lab were locked too—because I’d locked myself inside! But after my heart scare, I realized that, without even knowing it, at some point, I’d sleepwalked out of my Mental Lab, and the doors had shut and locked behind me.  Then, on February 6, I received an email that twisted the knife. 

It came from Bob Babbitt, the man who introduced me to Greg Welch, one of the greatest triathletes ever, at the Ironman World Championship in 2008. 

Welch had undergone thirteen heart surgeries starting in his mid-thirties, which forced him into an early retirement. 

In my panicked state, I was sure this was some kind of bad omen, but Babbitt wrote to me with a simple question. 

He wanted to know if I’d consider running the Leadville Trail 100 later that summer to raise money for his charity, the Challenged Athletes Foundation (CAF).  Being interviewed by the great Greg Welch at Kona Ironman 2008 Since 1994, the CAF has raised $134 million and funded thirty-five thousand athletes with physical challenges to get the coaching and support they need. 

It is a worthy cause to say the least, but it had been five years since my last 100-miler, when I DNF’d (did not finish) at Badwater, so I didn’t reply right away. 

Instead, I stepped to the bathroom mirror and stared myself down. 

It wasn’t Goggins staring back. 

It was David, and he was timid as hell. 

I wondered if I would even be able to physically complete the race, let alone compete at the high level I had in so many ultra races during my prime. 

Those thoughts were painful because they told me that, although more than a month had passed since my trip to the ER, I was still a shell of my former self and felt fragile. 

I hadn’t been cleared to train hard because the doctors still didn’t know what was wrong with me, and as they put my heart through test after test, I remained low on motivation. 

After decades of hard charging, I was stuck in neutral, nowhere close to the mental beast I’d once been. 

When your entire life has been riddled with setbacks, landmines, and trap doors, some days, it’s nearly impossible to find the motivation to keep getting after it. 

It’s just too exhausting, and in that moment, I had no idea how much I had left in the tank. 

I searched my own eyes for an answer, a commitment, the last glowing embers of confidence from what used to be a raging inner fire. 

If Badwater is the best-known ultra race on earth, the Leadville Trail 100 Run is a close second. 

The race begins and ends outside the old Rocky Mountain mining town of Leadville, Colorado, which is set at just over ten thousand feet above sea level and is rougher around the edges than the flashy ski resort and hippie towns nearby. 

The course is an out-and-back grind, with several major climbs combining for a total of over fifteen thousand vertical feet of elevation gain. 

I’d run Leadville once before, and I knew that fewer than half of all entrants are able to finish the race under the thirty-hour time limit. 

And those were runners without unidentified heart problems and sickle cell trait (which makes carriers more prone to altitude sickness). 

And when you live at sea level, training for a race at altitude is that much more difficult. 

Plus, with my speaking calendar packed to the limit, I knew I had months of travel and nothing but garbage training ahead of me. 

I’d be forced to run in strange cities down avenues with tons of stoplights and packed sidewalks or in  residential areas I barely knew on roads peppered with four-way stops. 

For Leadville, ideal training isn’t just optimal, it is required if you expect to pull off an acceptable personal performance. 

Oh, I had plenty of convenient excuses to tap out. 

My hesitation was telling. 

My internal dialogue was trying to talk me out of a race I hadn’t even fully considered. 

This is what the average mind does. 

The reasons to say no to something that we know will require our maximum dedication and promises no guarantee of success will bubble up two at a time until we give up before we even get started. 

That’s when I knew I had already gone soft. 

Sometimes, the biggest decisions in your life—the ones that will set your trajectory for weeks, months, years, or even decades to come—sneak up on you. 

I had so many valid reasons to turn Babbitt down flat, but I couldn’t. 

Mostly because I could barely look at myself in the mirror and could not stand my weak tone. 

Sure, I was busy, but I could make time to train. 

During my peak years in ultra racing, I had an event almost every weekend and still worked full-time. 

Back then, I had bolted the doors of my Mental Lab and lived there day and night. 

I signed up for 100-mile runs like they were forty-five-minute spin or HIIT classes. 

I put a range of obstacles in front of me just to gain the experience. 

As far as my health went, my heart hadn’t given me any issues at all for ten years straight. 

I could use my Christmas trip to the ER as a crutch if I wanted to, but that’s exactly what it was, and the fact that I was still leaning on that crutch told me there was something subversive at work in my psyche and soul. 

“Is this what you’ve turned into?” I asked as I mad-dogged the man in the mirror. 

This wasn’t the filthy, tarnished mirror of my youth. 

This one gleamed like crystal. 

“Some guy that wakes up to bacon and eggs, watches sports, delivers keynote presentations, and poses for pictures? You’re not a savage. 

Not anymore. 

So, what are you?” Professional fighters don’t train for their biggest bouts at home. 

They head into the mountains or the woods, somewhere they can focus in relative isolation and without all the luxury. 

They don’t bring their families. 

They bring their trainers, and every move they make is about rediscovering their primal nature and that hunger that made them hard and turned them into champions.  Back in my military days, I was a fighter who never broke camp. 

I stayed primal. 

What made me hard were the horrible tasks I stepped to and knocked off one at a time without hesitation. 

My daily goal was to wake up before anyone else. 

Sometimes, that meant 0500, sometimes 0400, and occasionally, I woke up at 0300 because I needed the first footprints in the sand or on the trail to be my own. 

If for some strange reason they weren’t, I made sure that while they were sleeping at night, I was back out there grinding for two or three more hours. 

I was the unconditional competitor, a full-time savage. 

Then, things got comfortable, and I slipped into a new frame of mind. 

All the effort I’d put into conquering my negative mind had changed me. 

My demons and insecurities, which had been my primary energy sources for two decades, no longer owned the same real estate in my brain. 

I had managed to finally put each of them in their rightful place, and in that vacuum, a new sense of self emerged. 

To write my book, I’d developed the mindset of an artist, and the book’s great success was the one minefield I hadn’t anticipated. 

While money doesn’t always make you happy, it sure can make you feel satisfied. 

And satisfaction is a hop-step from complacency. 

Oh, I looked the part. 

I was ripped, and if you tried to run with me, you’d come away thinking that I still had it. 

But even though I worked out twice a day, I was a part-time savage at best, a glorified Weekend Warrior. 

Weekend Warriors do hard things when they fit into their busy schedules. 

They do them to check a box and only when they want to. 

Then, they dial it back after a couple of long, hard days. 

When you are a full-time savage, it’s a lifestyle. 

There is no “want to.” There is only “must do.” If I were still a true savage, still striving to be the hardest person to ever live, Babbitt’s email wouldn’t have inspired some soft, should-I-or-shouldn’t-I inner debate. 

It would have lit a fuse. 

While growth is important, you cannot lose the core of who you are. 

Your core is your stability. 

It’s what dictates how you move through the world. 

Physically, when your core muscles are weak, you are literally a pushover. 

Psychologically, when your core values come into question, it’s easy to lose yourself, and I could not afford to lose touch with the hard work it took to build this new life. 

But my Cookie Jar was stuffed with moldy cookies—stale victories from a different time that I couldn’t relate to anymore. 

My Cookie Jar had always been an energy source, stocked with accomplishments that I could use to remind myself what I had overcome and was capable of. 

I knew I had to toss them all out and start fresh, but something inside me was still reluctant to reenter the crucible.  Mental toughness and resilience fade if they aren’t used consistently. 

I say it all the time: you are either getting better, or you’re getting worse. 

You’re not staying the same. 

And I’d failed to heed my own words. 

I wasn’t training to gain any longer. 

I had become a maintenance man, and while it’s certainly possible to maintain muscle tone and a certain level of cardiovascular fitness, you cannot maintain the savage mind. 

If you stop grabbing iron with your bare hands, they will lose their callouses. 

Your mind works the same way. 

You have to fight to keep that mindset of getting up every day to get after it because it wants to go away. 

Surgery, sickness, busy work schedules, and family commitments are all great excuses to take a rest today, which makes it that much easier to rest again tomorrow, and that’s a slippery slope! The way I live and the things I do have always been about the mind. 

Long before the body goes soft, the mind will have softened. 

Fortunately, I wasn’t that far gone, but my mind had softened a bit because I hadn’t been challenged to the edge of my capabilities in years. 

As much as I wanted to turn Babbitt down flat, I couldn’t get Leadville out of my mind for days, and those days turned into weeks. 

The man’s casual proposition had become my haunting, and the more I thought about my questionable heart, other lingering health issues, and my busy schedule, the less any of those variables seemed to matter. 

I had dealt with worse training, less sleep, and more travel in the military than I faced now. 

When I trained for Badwater the first time, my feet and ankles were so destroyed I couldn’t even run for the first four weeks of training. 

I had to work out on the elliptical or with a rowing machine, and I never even considered letting injuries stop me. 

As winter turned to spring, I knew it was time to find my primal nature again, but I still didn’t commit to Leadville. 

For eight weeks, I lived in self-imposed purgatory. 

Depending on the minute, hour, or day, I told myself I was in and then enumerated all the valid reasons why it was best not to enter the race. 

Then, in April, after my cardiologist cleared me to train harder, I dipped my toe into the Leadville waters like the part-time savage I’d become. 

I didn’t commit to Bob, but I did bump up my training…to a point. 

Instead of putting together a series of 100-mile weeks, I was content to clock in with fifties, but on those runs, my focus was way off. 

I hardly remembered anything I felt or saw out on the road.  This was unusual because unlike most people, I can’t check out mentally when I run, and I don’t use those miles to think about my to-do list. 

I have to stay locked in because I’m not a naturally gifted runner. 

The reason I can run at a relatively quick clip for a long time is due to my training volume but also because when I run, I focus on my stride, remain conscious of where and how my feet strike the ground and on my head and shoulder position. 

I visualize myself running with a tray of full water glasses on my head. 

I don’t want any sway or bounce at all. 

I remain still yet relaxed and let my core and legs carry me forward. 

Obviously, that amount of focus is tough to maintain for hours at a time. 

When I’m running well, I catalog every wrinkle in my form, each faulty foot strike. 

I can recall exactly where and when they happened and review them all in my mind’s eye afterward. 

Because I don’t run to burn calories or maintain cardiovascular fitness. 

To me, it’s about achieving mental and physical greatness. 

The fact that I’d lost touch with that told me that I’d become just another runner, and I’d never been satisfied being just another anything. 

If I wanted to crush Leadville and find myself again, I needed to demand more from myself on a daily basis. 

I had to sharpen my focus. 

I told Kish that I didn’t want her to book any more speaking engagements. 

I have never been about the business aspect anyway, and while I appreciated all the respect and support from the people and organizations I engaged with, I knew it was having a corrosive effect on my mindset. 

The ego is an amazing force. 

The more I heard about my own success, the more tempting it became to coast, as if I’d finally arrived. 

Even though I know that the journey never ends and that there is always more work to do, when life stops kicking you in the teeth and serves you a big bowl of praise pudding instead, it’s easy to feel that you are the man. 

Especially if that level of respect was hard- earned. 

But praise—whether it comes from your supervisors, your family, or anyone else—has a downside. 

It can soothe the inner savage and keep you from feeling the need to grind. 

My ego check had to include a moratorium on all things soft. 

I needed to break back into the Mental Lab and find the savage I used to be. 

I stopped taking most calls and texts. 

I tuned out and turned within. 

Which is another way of saying I put together a grueling ten-week, 1,200-mile training plan. 

Most people will tell you that 100-mile weeks are overkill because running that much for almost three months straight won’t allow your body to recover properly. 

While ten miles a day  had always been my sweet spot, I now had to tell my mind and body that I was no longer playing around. 

I needed that triple-digit mileage. 

I needed to land in Leadville knowing that I put the proper training in. 

On June 4, I emailed Babbitt and told him that if there was still space, I was willing to “race across the sky” for CAF. 

Part-time savage that I was, I emailed him three days after his deadline. 

Proof that Goggins was still MIA, and David was the one making all the moves. 

But Babbitt managed to get me in, and a week later, Kish and I landed in Avalon, New Jersey, for several weeks of training. 

Avalon is on a pancake-flat, seven-mile-long island dotted with sprawling modern homes where Kish’s family spends their summers on the sand. 

It’s a pretty place filled with smiling families enjoying their summer vacations. 

The water is warm, the white-sand beaches are packed, and groups tend to gather on the bay to watch sunset each evening, soft serve ice cream cones in hand. 

Or so I’m told. 

I wouldn’t know. 

I spent my time out on the road. 

I ran fifteen to twenty-five miles every day in the muggy East Coast summer heat. 

Training at altitude wasn’t an option, so peak heat and humidity at sea level would have to do. 

Most days, I crisscrossed the island multiple times to get my miles in. 

I never checked the weather before I left the house, and at first, I carried a single water bottle with me but quickly learned that wasn’t nearly enough. 

After an hour, that bottle would be empty, and I had to finish the run dry. 

I experimented with my hydration the best I could. 

I tried carrying two bottles. 

I staged the course by dropping bottles in the bushes, but by Independence Day, when the heat cranked up above ninety degrees and the humidity index rose above 85 percent, those bottles were heating up so much they were worthless. 

I went back to carrying just the one bottle. 

After I drained it, my hydration plan was the same one I used on long runs in the tropics back in my military days. 

Whenever I got thirsty, I licked my damn lips. 

Humidity and hydration weren’t my only problems in Avalon. 

There were pests. 

I ran through clouds of ravenous mosquitoes, and down by the water, I dealt with the island’s notorious greenheads—biting flies that wouldn’t leave me alone. 

Oh, and don’t let me forget the attack birds. 

It was just my luck that red-winged blackbirds nest in Avalon every summer, usually on the quiet inland roads I preferred.  Whenever I came within a quarter mile of any nest, a bird flew at me and tried to bury its talons into my scalp. 

They circled, squawked, and dove until I was out of their territory. 

Of course, there were miles of nests and dozens of angry birds. 

After a few days, I learned to take off my shirt well ahead of time so I could swing it at those feathered beasts to keep the dive bombers at bay. 

Yessir, we were a sight to behold. 

The weeks progressed, and the conditions deteriorated. 

And that’s when I began to enjoy myself. 

Some days, I left the house without breakfast and after barely eating dinner the night before. 

I wanted to run my daily twenty bonked because I knew a moment like that was bound to come in the Rocky Mountains. 

I needed to train the body to churn out miles even after the fuel tank was drained and send a message to myself that I was capable of finding energy where there was none. 

One afternoon, I hit a wall at mile fifteen. 

My pace plummeted from seven minutes per mile to the mid-nines. 

I was out of water, of course. 

But as miserable as it was, I found myself enjoying being dizzy, dehydrated, and calorie-starved. 

I relished the suffering because it let me know that I still had it in me to push myself that hard, and I scorched the final mile in seven minutes flat. 

One of the hottest days of the year was in mid-July, when the mercury climbed above one hundred degrees and the humidity was over 80 percent. 

The heat index was off the charts, and the air quality was horrible too. 

The county issued a warning advising residents to remain indoors. 

In Gogglish, that meant it was the perfect day for a twenty-two-mile run. 

Avalon is always bumping during the month of July, when the bike lane is heavily trafficked and the pancake houses and bakeries have long lines of eager customers. 

That day, the streets were silent. 

For ten miles, I didn’t see anybody at all. 

In the eleventh mile, a car crept past me ever so slowly, and I could tell the driver recognized me. 

Sure enough, he flipped a U-turn and came rolling right up beside me. 

“David Goggins! Man, I knew that was you!” I glanced over at him. 

He looked reasonably fit and athletic. 

He was also baffled, and maybe even a little concerned, as he watched me pound the pavement. 

“Dude, why are you even out here on a day like this?” I shrugged and shook my head.  “Because you’re not.” I didn’t think much of my flippant comment at first. 

But as I ran ahead, I savored it. 

I’d picked the worst day of the summer for my longest run of the week. 

Why? Because nobody else would even consider doing something like that, and that gave me a chance to prove myself to be uncommon amongst the uncommon once again. 

I wasn’t exactly the savage from SEAL training, but I was closer than I’d been in years. 

I ran on in a state of mind that I hadn’t experienced since Strolling Jim, a Tennessee road race I won in 2016. 

I’d attacked that course with calm focus and ran those 41.2 miles like it was a marathon, at a 7:07 per mile pace. 

I tracked down the race leader with eight miles to go, then held on to finish in under five hours and win by three minutes. 

In the brutal heat of Avalon, I discovered that same state of mind and body and realized that the man I thought I’d buried with too much comfort and success was still inside me, waiting to be unleashed.  On the comeback at Strolling Jim…or so I thought The world needs doctors, lawyers, and teachers, but we also need savages to prove that we are all capable of so much more. 

After ten weeks of hard-charging and eight weeks of heat training, I was well on my way to rediscovering something I thought I’d lost.       Evolution No. 

3 Many dreams die while suffering. 

Think about it. 

We conjure our biggest dreams, our most audacious goals, when we feel safe and warm. 

Even if you’re struggling financially, emotionally, spiritually, or physically, your grand plan to defy the odds probably came to you in a moment of comfort, when you had time to evaluate where you are and how you got there. 

There is no space for big-picture thinking when you’re in the heat of battle. 

When all is calm, even temporarily, damn near anything can feel possible. 

So that’s when you dream it up and map it all out. 

Then you begin and unforeseen challenges knock you back. 

Whenever you’re engaged in an intense struggle, the result of which will have a major impact on your life going forward, you will be challenged to your utmost—and these moments of truth within a larger quest can demand so much from you that you are bound to feel overmatched at times. 

When that happens, many people panic because they come to believe that they are imposters and their dream was actually a fantasy. 

In a blink, they go from being driven and focused to becoming convinced that they had no business even trying. 

So they quit. 

Right then. 

Right there. 

While teetering on the edge, they fail to grasp that there is something they can do to jam that quitter’s spiral carrying them right down the drain. 

They can make the One-Second Decision to think instead of react. 

During my second Hell Week, when I was in Class 231, I was driven. 

Bill Brown and I were the leaders of Boat Crew Two, and we had our own competition going to see who would be the baddest man in the whole class. 

But there was another guy in the mix who had captured my attention—let’s call him Mora. 

He was about our size, strong and fit, and whenever things got hard on the beach or the Grinder, he gravitated toward me. 

He was not in our boat crew yet wanted to feed off of my energy because Bill Brown and I were performing at such a high level, we made hell look and feel not only manageable but easy. 

On day two of Hell Week, Mora found me in the chow hall with a lost look on his face and fear in his eyes. 

I was busy filling my wet and sandy pockets with packets of peanut butter because I needed fuel to withstand the punishment I knew was  coming. 

Even after consuming as many calories as I could, in two hours, I’d be hungry again and would eat almost anything, even peanut butter gritty with sand and laced with pocket lint. 

Mora stared at me as if I were a creature from a different time, and I was. 

I’d become wholly uncivilized after two days of surf torture and boat runs without a wink of sleep. 

I was now a caveman. 

Mora, on the other hand, looked like a traumatized modern man, and that was a clue that something was off. 

“Hey, Goggins,” he whispered as his eyes darted around the room. 

“I don’t wanna be here anymore.” The pressure cooker of Hell Week had temporarily unhinged him from his dream and his rational mind, and he looked like he was searching for an emergency exit. 

He was panic in human form, and I knew that because it was exactly how I felt when the first wave hit me in the very first hour of that same Hell Week. 

The Pacific Ocean was as cold as ever when that massive, six-foot wall of water picked me up, flipped me three times, and pounded me into the wet sand. 

It was as if the ocean itself was saying, “Get the hell out of here!” And I listened because my lungs were still burning from the bout of pneumonia that got me rolled into this class from Class 230 just two months earlier, and because water was my kryptonite. 

There were 130 hours of Hell Week to come, and I knew that a good chunk of them would be spent in the cold ocean. 

That cocktail of suck hijacked my brain to send out signals far more troubling than ambivalence. 

I wasn’t wondering if I had what it took or if I was prepared for the moment. 

The voice in my head was saying, I don’t really want to be a Navy SEAL. 

For more than a year, my quest to become a SEAL had been all-consuming. 

I’d never wanted anything as badly or committed so completely to the process, but when you are locked into a sufferfest, there are times when the conditions will become intolerable, and a self-sabotaging impulse rooted in shock and fear will feel like clarity. 

I was a half-step from voluntarily pulling the plug on a dream that had the power to change the course of my entire life. 

I glanced over at Bill Brown, resigned to the fact that he would soon stand alone as the baddest man in Class 231. 

Then, from the knee-deep, swirling shallows, I scanned the horizon, where a destroyer was heading out to sea. 

The instructors had warned us that if we didn’t make it through training, we’d be assigned to a ship like  that, where we’d be stuck chipping paint for six months at a time. 

They made it sound like the most miserable deployment on earth, but to me, in that instant, it sounded like heaven. 

Most SEAL instructors love quitters. 

When you tell them that you’re too cold and you want out, they are more than happy to take you by the hand and lead you to the warmest shower of your life because, in their minds, it proves that they are better than you. 

Once you step into that shower, you get so warm within a minute that you forget what being cold even felt like, and then, you realize that your warmth just cost you a piece of your soul, if not the whole thing, which can lead to a lifetime of regret. 

Time was of the essence! I could not crawl back onto the beach and take ten minutes to get my mind right. 

I was in the eye of a psychological storm, and all around me, the water was still frothing and growling. 

Part of the problem was that the cold water had stolen the breath from my lungs. 

I was gasping and panic- breathing. 

In order to think clearly, I needed oxygen. 

I took a deep breath and then another, and in that time, my possible future played out in my head. 

I watched myself stagger back to the beach and lay my helmet down. 

Within days, I was flushed right out of the military and sent back to Indiana, where I struggled through a series of low-level, low-impact jobs, which were the only ones I was qualified for: minimum-wage security guard, lifeguard at a local pool, and exterminator. 

That was true clarity. 

All my aspirations would be vaporized if I left surf torture behind because I was a reservist, and if I snapped and quit, the Navy wouldn’t even want me on one of their ships. 

I could not afford to lose control. 

SEAL training—and that cold ocean—were exactly where I belonged, so I needed to calm down and meet the challenge head- on. 

I took another breath as the next big wave swelled. 

It smashed me, but I managed to scramble toward the group and lock arms with my teammates. 

I was done showing weakness. 

I was finished with fear. 

I would stay in that water as long as it took! When we got called back onto the sand ten minutes later, the men in my boat crew were shivering and stiff. 

They were so cold they didn’t even want the edges of their soaked T-shirts to graze their skin. 

We needed to warm up fast, and the only way to  do that during Hell Week is to go hard. 

I nodded to Bill, grabbed the front of the boat, and shouted out orders. 

As a unit, Boat Crew Two started putting out like Hell Week was our natural habitat. 

Often, it’s the shock that launches the spin-out. 

For me, it was the snap of the cold water that triggered my fight-or-flight response, which comes with an adrenaline rush that spikes the heart and respiratory rates and puts your insecurities on blast. 

Your body and mind react that way because they want to protect you by telling you to remove yourself from the suffering. 

Fight or flight is exactly what Mora was experiencing in the chow hall. 

His fear and panic owned him. 

When I was teetering on the brink, I was able to physically calm myself down with a few deep breaths, and that helped me see through the adrenaline rush. 

My heart rate was still elevated, and panic continued to creep in, but I’d regained enough of my composure to make a conscious One-Second Decision to stay in the fight. 

That took mental fortitude because the water hadn’t suddenly warmed up. 

I was still cold and miserable and staring at 130 hours of Hell. 

But I was able to see that the life I desired was on the other side of surf torture. 

I did not cave into emotion and quit. 

When people do that, they aren’t even making an actual decision to quit. 

It’s a default reaction due to stress. 

I get that it’s difficult not to give in to all that emotion, acute pain, and discomfort. 

All you really want at that point is for it to end. 

You envision your bed at home and how sweet it feels to lie down with your wife or husband or partner. 

You know your mom will greet you with a forgiving hug and that your family will understand because they love you no matter what. 

You know for a fact that they will console and take care of you, and when you’re hurting bad or scared to death, all of that feels way too good to pass up. 

But you must remember that those images of home aren’t actually rooted in love. 

They are a product of your fear, disguised as love. 

Mora and I shared the same big dream. 

We’d both had our worlds rocked. 

I recovered by dominating Hell Week in a fashion that nobody had seen before. 

Mora’s mind had already unraveled by the time I saw him in the chow hall. 

He wasn’t thinking consciously at all. 

His emotions were controlling him instead of the other way around. 

I couldn’t help him because by then, he’d already lost the battle. 

I don’t know when he officially quit. 

In Hell Week, you get so wrapped up in your crew, so engulfed in helping one another get to the other side that, after several hours, you might look up and find half the class has bailed out. 

All I know is that, at some point, he rang the bell and lived to regret it.  Everything in life comes down to how we handle those crucial seconds. 

When psychological, physical, or emotional pressure redlines, your adrenal glands go haywire, and you are no longer in control. 

What separates a true savage from everybody else is the ability to regain control of their mind in that split second, despite the fact that all looks lost! That’s what people miss. 

Our lives aren’t built on hours, days, weeks, months, or years. 

Hell Week is 130 hours, but it’s not the hours that kill you. 

And it’s not the pain, the exhaustion, or the cold. 

It is the 468,000 seconds that you must win. 

It only takes one of those seconds—when it all becomes too much and you just can’t take it anymore—to bring you down. 

I had to remain vigilant and manage my mind for every single one of those seconds to make it. 

Life, like Hell Week, is built on seconds that you must win, repeatedly. 

I’m not saying you have to be hyperaware every second of your life, but if you are pursuing something that demands all you’ve got and means the world to you, that is often what it takes. 

When you are trying to lose weight or quit drinking or using drugs, your moment of weakness can be counted in seconds, and you’ll need to be ready to win those seconds. 

You could be the medical student who has dreamed of being a doctor their entire life, only to fail a crucial class early on. 

Overwhelmed with panic, you may be tempted to march straight to the admissions office and withdraw. 

Maybe you are an aspiring lawyer with a job at a prestigious firm in your back pocket yet failed the bar exam again, and in the heat of that moment, you abandon your career before it begins. 

All because you become convinced that you cannot walk back into that office after another humiliation or study for that test again and put yourself right back on the chopping block. 

While school and professional exams are held in controlled environments, an F can spike the heart rate and trigger self-doubt as quickly as a six-foot wall of cold water. 

Sometimes, that grade looms so large, especially in a young mind, that it’s easy to feel like all eyes are on you and your failure and that you’ve fallen so far behind that you’ll never catch up.  Moments of doubt are unavoidable when we take on any strenuous task. 

I’ve used the One-Second Decision to regain my composure and win hundreds of small battles during ultra races, on the pull-up bar, and in stressful work situations. 

And the first step is to mentally take a knee. 

The best person in any combat scenario is the one who is composed enough to take a knee when the bullets are flying at them. 

They know they need to evaluate the situation and the landscape to find a way forward and that it’s impossible to make a conscious decision if they or their team is running around like fire ants. 

Taking a knee in battle is not as easy as it sounds, but it’s the only way to give yourself time to breathe through the panic and rein in your spinning mind so you are able to operate. 

The battle hasn’t stopped. 

Gunfire is still lighting up the night, and you don’t have any time to waste. 

In that one second, you must take a breath and decide to bring the fight. 

When you are in the grip of life and in danger of losing control, just think, It’s time to take a knee. 

Get a couple of breaths and flash to your future. 

If you fold, what will happen next? What’s your plan B? This is not some deep contemplation. 

There is no time to order a pizza and hash it out with your people. 

This must happen in seconds! It helps to prepare with productive self-talk before you drop into that sufferfest on your schedule. 

Remind yourself that nobody is great at every single aspect of any job, at least not right away, and no runner skates through a hard race unchallenged. 

No matter how bleak it looks or feels, you must stay rooted to your baseline. 

If you’re in med school, your baseline is to graduate and become a doctor. 

In Coronado, my baseline was becoming a Navy SEAL. 

Many men buckled under the log during Hell Week, but log PT was easy for me. 

I had to remember that every time we were ordered back into my own personal torture chamber, the Pacific Ocean. 

It helps to remind yourself of what you’re good at and where you excel so when you have to engage in something that is hard for you, it doesn’t become overwhelming. 

Tell yourself, I’m good here. 

I’m great there. 

This sucks, but it will be over in twenty minutes. 

Maybe it’s twenty miles or twenty days or twenty  weeks, but it doesn’t matter. 

Every experience on earth is finite. 

It will end someday, and that makes it doable, but the outcome hinges on those crucial seconds you must win! There are consequences to this stuff. 

Quitting on a dream stays with you. 

It can color how you see yourself and the decisions you make going forward. 

Several men have taken their own lives after quitting SEAL training. 

Others marry the first person who comes around because they are so desperate for validation. 

Of course, the reverse is also true. 

If you can withstand the suffering, take a knee, and make a conscious One-Second Decision in a critical juncture, you will learn perseverance and gain strength by winning the moment. 

You will know what it takes and how it feels to overcome all that loud doubt, and that will stay with you too. 

It will become a powerful skill you can use again and again to find success, no matter what scenario you’re in or where life takes you. 

It’s not always the wrong move to quit. 

Even in battle, sometimes we must retreat. 

You might not be ready for whatever it is you’ve taken on. 

Perhaps your preparation wasn’t as thorough as you’d thought. 

Maybe other priorities in life need your attention. 

It happens, but make sure that it is a conscious decision you’re making, not a reaction. 

Never quit when your pain and insecurity are at their peak. 

If you must retreat, quit when it’s easy, not when it’s hard. 

Control your thought process and get through the most difficult test first. 

That way, if you do bow out, you’ll know it wasn’t a reaction based on panic. 

Instead, you’ve made a conscious decision based on reason and had time to devise your plan B. 

Mora quit on impulse. 

Usually when you do that, you don’t get another chance. 

Many great opportunities in life only come around once, but sometimes, opportunity does knock twice. 

Fifteen months after that morning in the chow hall, we crossed paths in Coronado again. 

It was my graduation day, and he was in our Hooyah class, the incoming trainees wearing the white shirts that signified Day One, Week One. 

Of all the two hundred and some newbies, he was the only man there who wasn’t smiling. 

He alone knew too much. 

After the ceremony, he approached, extended his hand, and congratulated me. 

“Remember,” I said, “many dreams die while suffering, bro.” He nodded once, then faded into the crowd. 

A month later, I heard he made it through Hell Week. 

Five months after that, he graduated and became a Navy SEAL.  I thought about Mora as I gazed into my pristine, polished mirror twenty-two years later while considering Babbitt’s invitation to Leadville. 

I’d been living large for longer than I cared to admit. 

In this new life of mine, the water was never cold and the One-Second Decision was in danger of becoming a perishable skill. 

I didn’t think I needed it anymore. 

I had access to all the finer things. 

In my house, it was always seventy-two degrees. 

And that feels good, especially when you believe you’ve earned it. 

Why put myself through a ten-week training camp or a 100-mile run in Colorado’s thin air? I knew how horrible that experience is and what it takes, but I also knew that this right here was one of the most important One-Second Decisions in my life. 

This wasn’t a fight-or-flight moment. 

I wasn’t overwhelmed by the fear of death. 

I wasn’t on the brink of failure or humiliation, and my heart rate was beating slow and steady. 

This was a mature version of the unconscious impulse to quit. 

The one you don’t see coming until it greets you at the gate when you think you’ve finally arrived. 

See, I don’t have any respect for people who live this luxe life 24/7. 

If I said no to Babbitt, I wouldn’t be quitting on him. 

I would be quitting on myself. 

I would be making a fear-based choice to no longer be the very person who I became so proud of. 

It’s all well and good to have success and reach a certain level, but I really don’t care what you did yesterday. 

Maybe you finished Ultraman or graduated from Harvard. 

I do not care. 

Respect is earned every day by waking up early, challenging yourself with new dreams or digging up old nightmares, and embracing the suck like you have nothing and have never done a damn thing in your life. 

There are 86,400 seconds in a day. 

Losing just one of those seconds can change the outcome of your day and, potentially, your life. 

#OneSecondDecision #NeverFinished Chapter Four    4. 

A Savage Reborn Two weeks before the race, Kish and I flew into Aspen to acclimatize, but after a week of two-a-days, including long trail runs in the morning and daily speed hikes up Ajax Mountain each afternoon, my body was in shutdown mode. 

I wasn’t sleeping well, and my lungs felt torched. 

Even walking up the stairs left me winded. 

My legs were knotted up so tight that I had no turnover at all. 

Kish shadowed me on every run and noticed that my pace was declining each day. 

In our hotel room after yet another disappointing training session, she sensed my frustration. 

“You don’t need to do this to yourself, David,” she said. 

“You’ve run this race before. 

If you never enter another race in your life, you will still have done more than most people can even dream of doing.” I sat on the edge of the bed and turned to her. 

I could see the concern in her eyes. 

She still hadn’t gotten over my latest heart scare, and it was painful for her to watch the thin air jack me up. 

But all I could think about was the last time I’d signed up for a 100-miler. 

It was Badwater 135 in July 2016. 

I’d been stretching two hours a day for a few years by then, and as my muscles grew more pliable, I became convinced I was unlocking more mental and physical potential. 

I’d won Strolling Jim in Tennessee in early May and was confident when I drove up to Death Valley a few weeks before Badwater to get a training run in. 

But seven miles into that run, the heat became so intense that my pulse skyrocketed, and then the craziest thing happened. 

I stopped. 

I was the guy who’d savored scorching temperatures. 

I’m not beating any world- class runner based on speed alone, but if it’s a hot sufferfest, I have a chance. 

That’s how I’d always thought, yet there had been a sudden glitch in my operating system, and that mentality was “file not found.” When race day came around, I was nowhere near Badwater Basin, the start line of the race.  “Do you want me to call the guys?” Kish asked. 

I’d lined up two friends to crew the race. 

They were hours away from boarding their flights. 

“Should I cancel their trips and tell them Leadville is off?” Kish was right that given how I felt physically, one hundred unnecessary miles at altitude seemed like the very definition of a very bad idea. 

And now, she was telling me I was one phone call away from salvation, and I wouldn’t even have to make it myself. 

However, while my body was most definitely jacked up, my mind was starting to harden up. 

This was not 2016! So what if my legs weren’t churning, Kish could hang with me on every run, or Ajax repeatedly kicked my butt? Altitude wasn’t my problem. 

The only issue I could see was that I hadn’t run a 100-mile race in five years, and I’d forgotten that feeling worn out before a race was status quo for me. 

I’d never tapered before any of my events back in the day, which meant I never once showed up to the start line with loose, rested legs. 

Whether I came in first, second, third, or last made no difference to me back then. 

I’d once walked one hundred miles to finish Badwater, and if I had to, I’d do it again in Leadville. 

In other words, everything was in its rightful place. 

Even with my physical fitness faltering, my mind was gaining strength with every hour spent on the trails. 

I was starting to think like a savage again and banking knowledge that I had successfully climbed steep terrain at altitude, despite how I felt, so that I could lean on that experience to keep me feeling confident, even when I was uncomfortable, undernourished, sleep deprived, and dehydrated and on the steepest, hardest climbs of the Leadville course. 

An unprepared mind prefers a proper taper and rested legs. 

It prays for a clear, sixty-degree race-day morning and a tailwind that flows in both directions. 

And maybe a little drizzle every third mile, but only for a few seconds, to cool off. 

Not enough to make the trail muddy or slick. 

A prepared mind craves the worst conditions because it knows that pressure brings out its best and exposes almost everyone else. 

It doesn’t care if your legs are working right, if the temperature is perfect, if there is one miserable hill or an entire  mountain range waiting to crush you. 

When there are freezing river crossings, it doesn’t concern itself with your wet feet. 

It doesn’t pay any attention to distance, and it sure doesn’t give a damn how long it takes to get there. 

The prepared mind is a magnificent thing, and mine was just about ready. 

My nutrition plan was dialed in, and my self-talk and visualization were on point. 

And you know what that guaranteed me? Absolutely nothing! So much had changed since my last race. 

These events used to be my time away from humanity. 

It was the place I went to enter an animal state of body and mind, and it was easy to disappear because not many people were into the sport. 

Back in the early 2000s, there were only about twenty or so 100-mile events in the entire calendar year, raced by a hard-core crew of runners hungry for some suffering. 

You could rock up on the day of the race and gain entry. 

Now, there are more than two hundred 100-mile races each year in the United States alone. 

Ultra running had gone mainstream during my absence, and the start line for Leadville was surreal. 

The field was packed with over eight hundred happy, chatty athletes taking selfies and streaming live. 

The energy was palpable as we shook loose, preparing to tackle an out-and-back course, most of it on the Colorado Trail, which ranges between 9,200 feet and 12,600 feet in elevation. 

Most of us weren’t trying to win. 

Typically, less than half the field completes the course within the designated thirty-hour time limit. 

I’d learned long ago that no matter what type of event or challenge I engage in, the only competition that ever matters is me against me. 

A lot of people will take that as yet another invitation to coast. 

Please don’t. 

Though I hadn’t entered a 100-mile race in years, I planted a carrot—something to chase—in the back of my mind to keep my focus dialed in. 

Life is not pass/fail. 

It’s about impact and effort. 

Carrots help me maximize both and almost always produce a better result. 

If I was going to do Leadville, I was going to do Leadville to the best of my ability. 

No matter how bad I felt physically, I didn’t come all the way out here just to see if I could finish in thirty hours. 

My goal was to finish in under twenty-four. 

It took a few miles to get warmed up, but I was pleasantly surprised with my pace and form. 

My race plan was the same as usual. 

I would speed-hike the ups and run  the flats and downs. 

Most ultra runners use that strategy because running steep inclines burns your reserves, and you don’t really make up that much time. 

During a long event like Leadville, it’s better to spend your energy elsewhere. 

I had scouted the course thoroughly in the days before the race, looking for any edge. 

Not only to become reacquainted with the terrain but also so Kish knew how to get to where she and the rest of the crew needed to be. 

We visited the sites set to become aid stations and mapped everything out, leaving nothing to chance. 

My preparation was on point, but when you’re exhausted in the Rockies, no matter how well you’ve scouted a trail, it’s easy to get tricked into thinking you’ve reached the top of the pass when you aren’t even close. 

The Leadville Trail 100 has a bunch of false summits. 

The most infamous one is on Hope Pass at 12,600 feet above sea level. 

The climb begins at around the forty-mile mark, and it’s the last major pass before the turnaround at Winfield. 

By then, I’d found a rhythm, and my legs were still in decent shape despite having put in more miles that day than I had in three years. 

As the singletrack trail snaked steadily up toward the tree line, I speed-hiked by pressing my hands on my knees for leverage, while the vast majority of the other runners around me used trekking poles. 

I was an old-school ultra guy. 

To me, those poles looked like crutches. 

I was content going hands on knees all the way to the top. 

Nevertheless, poles were allowed, and they do make you faster. 

I could tell because I kept losing ground as the trail wound higher and higher. 

After a few miles, the trail poked out above the tree line and leveled off in the tundra. 

It looked and felt like we’d reached the top, and I saw several runners get happy. 

Pleased enough to pick up their pace, but as soon as we rounded the next bend and saw how much there was still left to climb, their heads dropped, and their shoulders slumped, while I smiled to myself and kept grinding. 

Bent at the waist, my palms pressed onto my knees, driving more power into the balls of my feet as they struck the ground, which allowed me to chop the climb down to size, one step at a time. 

People who’ve spent time on high country trails know the heartbreak of a false summit. 

When all you want is for the incline to stop kicking your butt, it tricks you into thinking you’ve made it, only to reveal that you aren’t even close! But you don’t have to be a trail rat to know that feeling. 

In life, there are plenty of false summits.  Maybe you think you’ve rocked an assignment at work or school, only to have your teacher or supervisor rip it to pieces or tell you to start over again. 

False summits can come in the gym when you’re doing a hard circuit workout and think you’ve hit the last set, only to hear from your coach or trainer—or from a quick glance at your own notes—that you have to go back through the entire circuit one last time. 

We all take a punch like that every once in a while, but those who tend to crane their necks looking for the crest of the mountain as they beg for their suffering to end are the ones who get smashed the most by any false summit. 

We have to learn to stop looking for a sign that the hard time will end. 

When the distance is unknown, it is even more critical that you stay locked in so the unknown factor doesn’t steal your focus. 

The end will come when it comes, and anticipation will only distract you from completing the task in front of you to the best of your ability. 

Remember, the struggle is the whole journey. 

That’s why you’re out there. 

It’s why you signed up for this race, or that class, or took the job. 

There is great beauty when you are involved in something that is so hard most people want it to end. 

When Hell Week ended, most of the guys who survived cheered, wept tears of joy, high-fived, or hugged one another. 

I got the Hell Week blues because I’d been immersed in the beauty of grinding through it and the personal growth that came with it. 

We can make any obstacle as big or small as we like. 

It’s all in the way we frame it. 

Going into Leadville, I expected one long, hard day. 

But how many inconsequential days had I lived by then? Why not spend one single day doing something I’ll be proud of for the rest of my life? Like Elmo said to Louden Swain in his apartment before the wrestling match of his life in the movie Vision Quest, “It ain’t the six minutes. 

It’s what happens in that six minutes.” When you’re climbing a mountain or involved in any other difficult task, the only way to free yourself from the struggle is to finish it. 

So why whine about it when it gets hard? Why hope it will end soon when you know it will end eventually? When you complain and your mind starts groping for the eject button, you are not bringing your best self to the task, which means you are actually prolonging the pain. 

The hard chargers keep their heads down and hammer away. 

They have trained their minds to stay hard in those hard moments. 

They recognize the false summit  for what it is and will always act as if they are nowhere near the top. 

Most people slow down and suffer on a steep trail, but slope and elevation are of no consequence to the hard charger. 

They keep their mind in attack mode until there are no more mountains to climb, and when they actually reach the top, they wish it had lasted a little bit longer. 

After about four miles of climbing, I jogged through the dip between two peaks at Hope Pass and shook my head. 

Over already? I thought as I picked up the pace and hammered the descent toward the turnaround at mile fifty, where my crew was waiting. 

I was just off my Leadville PR pace of twenty-two hours and fifteen minutes, which put me in the top forty in the entire field. 

Not that I knew that at the time. 

I didn’t wear a fitness watch. 

I wore a ten-dollar special from Walmart that I bought the day before because I didn’t want knowledge of my pace clouding my mindset. 

I was focused on one thing: the task at hand. 

After a short rest to eat and hydrate, it was time to retrace my steps and climb up Hope Pass from the backside, this time with a pacer. 

My old friend T.J. 

had stuffed his pack with the extra food, water, and gear he thought I might need, and his legs were fresh. 

His presence pushed me up that ascent at a strong pace, and although it had been some time since I’d run trails consistently, I had become a good technical trail runner over the years. 

That muscle memory clicked back in, which enabled me to attack the descent and fly down the other side. 

The final major climb in the race loomed at mile seventy-five. 

It’s called Powerline, and that one has a few false summits too. 

T.J. 

had a pair of trekking poles with him, and he kept offering them to me. 

He had been annoyed watching people with poles pass us on the backside of Hope Pass while I was still hiking hands on knees. 

We caught most of them on the way down and on the flats, only to give up ground again on Powerline. 

“Come on, man, just try the poles for a mile or two,” he said. 

“See if you like ’em.”  “Screw that,” I snapped, as two more people passed us up. 

“In the old days, that was cheating.” I was cooked by then. 

For the first time all day, the accumulated miles and my pace were starting to wear on me, and he could see it. 

“I’m telling you, Goggins.” I looked over as T.J. 

held them out like he knew he was presenting a weapon of last resort to a grumpy samurai still clinging to the old ways. 

I snatched them, irritated that I was abandoning the old ultra ethic. 

Then again, the sport had evolved, and this was an opportunity for me to evolve with it. 

As he promised, those poles took so much pressure off my legs they suddenly felt fresh, and I charged up that steep mountain. 

I was moving better and faster than I had in several hours. 

I passed seasoned ultra runners like so many slalom flags. 

My confidence swelled and my senses heightened as I moved up in the field. 

I felt so powerful and in the flow that something shook loose in my memory and tumbled to the front of my mind. 

That’s what makes events like Leadville so deep and poetic. 

A 100-mile grind at altitude will wring everything out of you, and as I flew up Powerline, I saw the scared kid who used to look for exits because he was blind to his own possibilities. 

*** My stuttering surfaced midway through third grade in my second year in Brazil, Indiana. 

By the time I was in fifth, I couldn’t say three words without stammering. 

It was especially bad around grown-ups and strangers and at its absolute worst when public speaking was involved. 

I’ll never forget the school play. 

Everyone knew I stuttered, but since participation was mandatory, my teacher mercifully assigned me a role with just one line. 

I practiced it at home a hundred times. 

Sometimes, I’d stumble. 

Usually, it came out smooth and wrinkle-free, but under those stage lights, I locked up. 

The silence was intolerable. 

There were fifteen, twenty people in attendance at most, all of them were parents, and you couldn’t ask for a more supportive audience. 

Everyone waited patiently, almost willing me to speak. 

A few of my classmates snickered, but most were rooting for me. 

My teacher watched with wide, sensitive eyes as my lower lip trembled. 

I knew it was hopeless, so I turned and left the stage without even trying.  I went to a small Catholic school. 

Everyone in my grade had known me for years, and I was relatively comfortable around them. 

Most had been there when my stuttering began midway through third grade, and they’d watched it mutate into a curse I couldn’t escape when I was asked to read aloud in class. 

Sometimes, I had to read a couple of sentences, especially when we were learning the definitions of new words. 

Often, it would be a paragraph or two, which made it even worse because then not only was my stammering an issue, but the fact that I struggled to read was also on blast. 

In those moments, time stopped, and I felt completely exposed. 

It didn’t matter that my curse had been nourished by past trauma and the anxiety of being the only Black kid in a White school. 

In my mind, I was now the stupid Black kid who stuttered and nothing more. 

My failure felt heavier than it actually was, and my anxiety around public speaking only grew. 

It got to the point where whenever the teacher called on us to read aloud, one after another, I would count paragraphs ahead, and at the most strategic moment, ask for a bathroom break. 

Unless I faked a headache or nausea to get sent home for the rest of the day. 

My entire existence in that school was built around avoiding exposure. 

It wasn’t about studying or improving. 

It was about dodging bullets because all I could see was incoming fire, which limited my ability to learn and grow. 

I started cheating to keep up because my stuttering convinced me I couldn’t hang in the classroom and that there was nothing for me in those schoolbooks. 

My last thoughts before I fell asleep each night and my first upon waking were of my own insignificance, stupidity, and worthlessness. 

Due to my hard upbringing, I was more aware of how the world worked than most fifth graders, and I couldn’t help but wonder how I was going to get through life if I couldn’t get a word out. 

What became of people like that? The thought terrified me. 

My world was closing in because my stuttering ruled me. 

It was all I could see, hear, and feel. 

There was no available space for any positive thought to take root in my brain. 

So, I gravitated toward shortcuts and hunted emergency exits. 

For many people, the haunting begins the minute they wake up. 

Maybe they are fat or disabled, feel ugly, or are failing and overwhelmed at school or work, and it consumes them. 

Their obsession with their own imperfections and faults suffocates self-respect and submarines progress, and from the time they get out of bed until  they are able to crawl back in that night, the only thing on their agenda is avoiding exposure and surviving another day in hell. 

When that’s how you feel about yourself, it’s impossible to see possibilities or seize opportunities. 

We all have the ability to be extraordinary, but most of us—and especially the haunted ones—tap out of the crucible and never experience what it’s like to get to the other side of hell. 

My metamorphosis was a brutal process that unfolded over decades, but eventually, I became the polar opposite of the kid frozen in the hot stage lights and the gaze of his teacher who only wanted to teach him to read. 

I became a full-time savage who walked the distant, narrow path with cliffs rising on both sides, no aid stations or rest areas, and no turnouts or exits of any kind. 

Whatever popped up in front of me had to be dealt with head-on because the full- time savage sees everything in life as an opportunity to learn, adapt, and evolve. 

However, when Babbitt’s message found me, at first, I looked for an exit. 

Then, I got my head back in the game and found a way. 

Now, over seventy-five miles into one of the most difficult races on earth, I felt unnaturally strong, which is exactly why those images from my fifth-grade play continued to run on a loop in my mind’s eye. 

Your strongest moments will often make you think of your weakest. 

I was pushing so hard my perspective ran deep, and I felt for that kid, knowing he allowed situations to dominate him for way too long. 

But I was proud of him too. 

For overcoming all of that. 

It is truly amazing what that little kid accomplished.  On stage speaking at The Patriot Tour, no longer afraid of stuttering (credit to Nature’s Eye)    After twelve years, it feels good to be back at Leadville. 

The descent from Powerline is on a fire road sprayed with so many rocks and boulders it’s difficult to find sure footing, but I made good time. 

From then on, whenever the trail leveled off, I ran. 

When the incline cranked back up, I used poles and hiked faster than I ever had before. 

Leadville was a purging of my soul. 

All the questions I had coming into the event about my inner drive and physical ability were answered. 

It was as if the high- altitude racecourse itself was a sculptor, and I was its marble masterpiece in progress: the image of a savage reborn. 

Every mile I ran, another chunk of rock fell away, and I came into the final aid station at mile eighty-seven thinking how crazy it was that a few days earlier, it looked like I might have to walk the whole thing. 

Now, with just thirteen miles to go, my legs still had a lot left. 

During my time in the aid station, I absorbed the scene. 

Some runners staggered in. 

Others laughed and joked with their crews while they ate and rehydrated. 

All of us were almost through a barbaric rite of passage, but after it was all over, how many would use it as an opportunity to ask deeper questions of their body and mind and demand more of themselves? Leadville 2019 was populated with plenty of part-  time savages. 

People who dial up their training for six or seven months, complete a race of a lifetime, and then sit back and do nothing else like it for years. 

As I headed out to run one last leg, I no longer wondered if I’d finish. 

The question now became, where would that finish line lead me? For the next two miles, when the trail pitched toward the peaks, T.J. 

and I walked. 

When it flattened out, we ran. 

I was tired, but T.J. 

was deep in the hurt locker, and when the flat sections stretched out into some distance, a sizable gap opened between us. 

I’m not a chatty runner, so I thought he was giving me some space, but after I started walking again, he caught me, and his breath sounded heavy and jagged. 

When we hit the last two miles of Turquoise Lake, one of the last long, flat sections of the race, he could not hang. 

The trail wrapped around the alpine lake, which was surrounded by craggy peaks, until it intersected with a steep jeep trail. 

A volunteer was stationed there in a van to guide exhausted runners in the proper direction. 

I was out of food and water, but that wasn’t my concern when I asked the volunteer if he had anything to spare. 

The guy handed me one unwrapped Pop Tart. 

I thanked him and waited, holding that darn thing for ten minutes, then fifteen. 

A few runners passed me, but there was no sign of T.J., so I took off running…away from the finish line! After half a mile, I saw T.J. 

walking my way. 

To say he was surprised to see me would be an understatement, and when I handed him that frosted snack, it sent him into a tailspin. 

As he ate, he lamented that he’d come to Colorado to support me, and now I was turning the tables to help get him to the finish line. 

He knew I’d abandoned my shot at a PR, saw me getting reeled in over and over, and felt like dead weight. 

A few minutes later, sometime around two in the morning, we reached the van again and began navigating a steep decline beneath a starry sky. 

A couple of headlamps came bobbing up from behind, getting closer and closer. 

It was another runner and his pacer. 

The runner slowed down as he caught us. 

When he recognized me, he stopped and smiled. 

I thought he was just another friendly dude happy to be nearing the finish line, but he had something else on his mind. 

“My son told me you were out here,” he said. 

“He actually challenged me to catch you. 

And I guess I caught you.”  “I guess you did,” I said. 

He nodded, pleased with himself, and ran off. 

“I can’t believe that guy.” T.J. 

shook his head as we watched him get swallowed by the night. 

“He didn’t catch you!” “Forget about him,” I said. 

It bothered me too, but I didn’t want T.J. 

to see that. 

It would only make him feel worse. 

“If it weren’t for me, he never would have even seen you.” T.J.’s eyes flashed with the first signs of life I’d seen in miles. 

He was more annoyed than I was. 

“He didn’t catch you. 

He caught your pacer!” He was so angry, in fact, that he started to run for a stretch, then staggered and walked to catch his breath. 

That sequence played out a few times. 

It was pretty clear he couldn’t maintain a workable pace, but that wasn’t the point. 

T.J. 

was sending me a message. 

He knew I still had plenty in the tank and that crossing the finish line with any amount of unburned fuel is a cardinal sin. 

With his hands on his knees, he turned to me and said, “What are you still doing here? You need to go hunt that guy down!” That was music to my ears. 

We shared an evil smile, and I took off. 

When I made the last turn on the racecourse, I had a gradual three-mile incline to hammer to reach the finish line. 

All but the elite of the elite walk that final stretch, which meant if I drained my tank, I would pass some runners. 

I had taken a snapshot of that smug dude in my mind’s eye, and I wanted to catch him. 

I used to take snapshots like that all the time. 

When I was a full-time savage, if you said something smart to me, I talked trash right back to you and used your disrespect as ammunition to propel me into whatever brutal task or race or workout I had lined up next. 

And there was always something.  We all have that ferocity—that dog—inside us. 

It’s a natural response to provocation, a close cousin of the survival instinct, but most of us keep it chained up and locked away behind closed doors because that savage side of ourselves doesn’t mix well with this “civilized” world. 

It’s obsessive. 

It’s always hungry, always looking for scraps of nourishment and finds them in competition, failure, and disrespect. 

I used to open that door on a regular basis, but as my life changed, I locked that beast away like almost everybody else and started letting those slights go. 

Any shade tossed in my direction was shed quicker than water down a duck’s back. 

I’d matured and decided to live a more balanced life. 

That wasn’t necessarily a bad thing, but it wasn’t all good either. 

I wasn’t hungry anymore. 

I passed over a lot of juicy scraps for years, but that smug runner’s casual comment did not slide down my back. 

The dog was hungry again, and on that agonizing final stretch, I realized how much I missed the feeling of being obsessed, the buzz I get from draining the tank dry. 

I’d deprived myself of it for way too long. 

If you want to maximize minimal potential and become great in any field, you must embrace your savage side and become imbalanced, at least for a period of time. 

You’ll need to funnel every minute of every single day into the pursuit of that degree, that starting spot, that job, that edge. 

Your mind must never leave the cockpit. 

Sleep at the library or the office. 

Hoop long past sundown and fall asleep watching film of your next opponent. 

There are no days off, and there is no downtime when you are obsessed with being great. 

That is what it takes to be the best ever at what you do. 

Know that your dedication will be misunderstood. 

Some relationships may break down. 

The savage is not a socialized beast, and an imbalanced lifestyle often appears selfish from the outside. 

But the reason I’ve been able to help so many people with my life story is precisely because I embraced being that imbalanced while I pursued the impossible dream of becoming the hardest person ever. 

That’s a mythical title, but it became my compass bearing, my North Star. 

And there it was again, flickering in the Colorado sky, brighter than all the other galaxies. 

It guided me up that hill and into another flowing rhythm as I passed five more runners. 

Each headlamp I collected yielded more energy to burn, and with a mile and a half to go in the race, I reeled in my last one. 

It was that smug dude. 

I  didn’t approach on the far-left side of the gravel road. 

I rushed right up on his shoulder. 

I didn’t touch him, but I was a hair’s width from him because I didn’t want him to be confused or disoriented in the darkness of night. 

I wanted him to know exactly who had run him down. 

He had no clue that when he found me a few miles back, minding my own business, I was helping my pacer. 

He couldn’t have known how much energy I had left, but when you don’t know who it is you’re talking to, the wise move is to lead with respect or say nothing at all. 

Instead, he ran his mouth, dropped some scraps, and fed the hungry dog inside me. 

Oh, but he had nothing to say when I blew past him. 

And neither did I. 

I didn’t even give him the satisfaction of looking over, but I heard him huffing and puffing, and when he lowered his head in shame, I was reminded of why you should always beware of spitting in the wind. 

I’d run a good race and finished in thirty-fifth place at 22:55:44, forty minutes slower than 2007 but still a darn good time considering there had been twelve long years and two heart surgeries between starts. 

Kish had never seen me finish a 100- miler. 

She was elated when I crossed the line and expected some big Hallmark moment, but I wasn’t in the mood to celebrate. 

Like Colonel Trautman said about Rambo, “What you call hell, he calls home.” And that’s exactly what I felt when I crossed the line. 

That I’d finally made it back home. 

But there was a storm brewing: the same borderline medical emergency that happens after every ultra race I finish, which meant we had to get back to our crew cabin in Breckenridge STAT. 

I stared out the window, fixated on my North Star as it tailed us on the forty-five-minute drive, tempting me to leave the soft life of balance and comfort behind and follow it. 

That told me that Leadville was not the one-off I had assumed it to be. 

Part of my hesitation in signing up in the first place was because I’d already done it. 

I’d run almost every meaningful race in the ultra game. 

I’d been there and done all of that, and now I knew that it wasn’t enough! What was next? Was it possible to operate as a full-time savage at forty-five years old, and if I gave it a shot, how long could I hold out? Those were questions for another night because before we pulled into the driveway, my body had already started to tighten up. 

I could feel the tremors coming on too, and while I knew what was next, this was unchartered territory for Kish.  The post-ultra unraveling was about to begin.     Evolution No. 

4 Although my childhood stuttering was alarming, I wasn’t completely undone by trauma. 

I was distracted by toxic stress. 

My pain kept me from living a complete and happy life in grade school, and it continued to haunt me into young adulthood, yet through it all, I retained enough self-awareness to realize how bad things were and remember each and every corner I cut. 

Strange as it sounds, I was one of the lucky ones. 

For some victims, their trauma is so devastating that they lose all their self-respect and self-awareness. 

They are torn down to the studs. 

Foundational aspects of their character pounded to dust. 

Part of what saved me from sliding all the way to rock bottom was what I saw in my mother. 

As much as she tried to hide it, she was the portrait of devastation. 

Which is why I’ve been able to study the work of the prisoner’s mind all my life. 

She’d been a young woman when she met Trunnis. 

He dazzled her until she was spellbound. 

Then, with every slap to the face, every hateful, disrespectful comment, each time he cheated on her, he siphoned more of her life force away until she lost contact with the attractive, intelligent, dignified, strong woman she used to be. 

It didn’t happen overnight. 

It rarely does. 

In abusive relationships, it’s almost always gradual, which is why it burns so deep. 

Until one day, you wake up owned by the person who is destroying you. 

In nature, destruction always gives way to creation, and my mother didn’t sit in her rubble for long once we arrived in Indiana. 

An urge to build again is in each of us, and she had it too. 

However, when you are rebuilding the self, it must be done consciously. 

She’d lost all her confidence and emotional coherence because she never completely liberated herself from my father. 

As a result, she didn’t know what she was building, and the bricks she laid became her prison cell. 

Subconsciously, she built a tower of mental and emotional isolation, and by the time I was eight years old, she was an empty shell. 

She hustled and strived, but very little registered with her emotionally. 

We lived parallel lives. 

I couldn’t even reach her.  The irony is you build those walls to protect yourself. 

You think they will make you hard and less vulnerable, but they isolate you in solitary confinement with your darkest thoughts and ugliest memories. 

You convince yourself that somehow you deserve to be there due to the bad life decisions you made. 

You believe that you are not worthy of more, or something better, and that the damage can’t be undone. 

You are filled with endless shame. 

When you look in the mirror, you don’t see yourself for who you are. 

And what keeps you locked up in your prison is that false narrative that you continually feed yourself and the false reflection you can’t escape because it is part of you. 

By the time I was in high school, my mom was an independent, successful woman who had survived domestic violence and landed a six-figure job at a top-tier liberal arts university. 

Those were the straight facts. 

Everyone around us saw the same thing, but in the mirror, she saw a worthless and undeserving person. 

While working as a college dean during my junior year of high school, she volunteered as a teacher in a prison. 

It wasn’t enough for her to be in her own mental prison; she wanted to experience a real one. 

Especially if it meant she’d have less time to sit with herself and consider her life in any meaningful way. 

After just a few weeks of work at the penitentiary, her daily routine—which had been damn near sacred since we arrived in Indiana—was all over the place, and I sensed something was off. 

How could I not, with the phone ringing every fifteen minutes? Weeks before I was to leave for Air Force boot camp, she finally explained what was going on. 

She was engaged to a man who’d been in a maximum-security prison for the last ten years. 

It took more than a few minutes for that statement to register before I asked, “What was he in prison for?” She didn’t answer right away. 

She had to collect her thoughts because there is no easy way of telling your son that your future husband is in prison for murdering a woman over drugs. 

He didn’t shoot her. 

This wasn’t an attempted robbery gone wrong. 

This man straight-up choked the life out of a woman over drugs. 

She went on to say that he was due to be released from prison the week after I left for boot camp and would be moving into our house. 

It is truly amazing what the mind can do when you fail to rebuild yourself consciously. 

My dad was a gangster and a crook. 

Her previous fiancé had been murdered in his own garage, and for an encore, she would marry a convicted murderer less than a week after his release from prison. 

My mom was looking for someone she could save because she did not have the strength to save herself. 

But the marriage did not go well. 

They would divorce within two years. 

He would relapse and eventually die of an overdose many years later.  To put it into plain text: when your self-worth goes away and you don’t deal with or accept your demons, they will continue to own you, and you will become a bottom feeder. 

I’m aware that most of the advice I give and stories I tell are built to help you push through impossible situations. 

However, sometimes what you need is a Hard Stop. 

If you ever find yourself in an abusive scenario like my mother’s or any sort of battle where you are losing your sense of self and verging on erasure, your best hope is to arrest the slide before you hit rock bottom. 

Hard Stops allow military units and individual soldiers to reorg. 

That includes reloading your empty magazines, taking inventory of your ammunition, and rearranging your gear so you have access to loaded weapons and anything else you may need in the hours ahead. 

You also must take a hard look at your battle plan and get a clear sense of what it is you’re facing and where it will lead. 

I know firsthand how torturous it is to be continually stalked by a predator. 

You lose all sense of normalcy. 

Reality becomes distorted, but I also know that moments of clarity do exist. 

My mom should have reorg’d after Trunnis smacked her in the face the first time, or the twelfth time, or even the fiftieth time. 

While I know this is hard to do, it is something that we must do for ourselves. 

It is non-negotiable. 

If she had, she might have noticed she was on a slippery slope that would lead to her utter destruction. 

She may have seen that it was not normal or tolerable to watch her kids work all-night skates day after day and then get beaten at home. 

In a toxic situation, you cannot keep moving blindly forward hoping it will end. 

It won’t, but you might. 

When you arrest the slide, you will be damaged but not completely broken. 

Your wound will likely become a distraction, but with intention and effort, you can heal and take control of your life. 

When you come to at rock bottom, that’s a different situation, and it won’t be a clean or easy fix. 

When inmates are released, they generally aren’t rehabilitated in a sustainable way. 

Most leave prison jacked up and often need more help if they are to piece their lives back together. 

You’ll need help too. 

You’ll need to find people who have survived or at least relate to what you’ve been through and can help you heal.  Of course, it takes self-esteem and self-awareness to seek help and share your brutal story, and when you are confined by the walls you built, awareness and confidence are non-existent. 

At that point, your only choice is to get angry. 

We are too often told that anger is an unhealthy emotion, but when someone or something has stolen your soul and destroyed your life, anger is a natural response. 

I am not talking about irrational rage, which can be disastrous and lead you down an even darker hole. 

I am talking about controlled anger, which is a natural source of energy that can wake you up and help you realize that what you went through wasn’t right. 

I have cracked open anger several times. 

It has warmed me when I was freezing, it has turned my fear into bravery, and it has given me fight when I had none. 

And it can do the same for you. 

Anger will snap you out of the spell you’re in until you are no longer willing to remain confined in your mental prison. 

You’ll be scratching and clawing at the walls, looking for cracks where the light leaks in. 

Your fingernails will be broken, the tips of your fingers bloody and raw, and you will continue to fight to expand those cracks because your anger will be purifying and the human mind loves progress. 

Keep at it, and eventually, those walls will tumble until you are free, standing in a debris field one more time, with your eyes wide open. 

That’ll work. 

Because destruction always breeds creation. 

Have the courage and mental endurance to do whatever it takes to start knocking down those walls. 

You are the warden of your life. 

Don’t forget you hold the keys. 

#PrisonerMind #NeverFinished Chapter Five    5. 

Disciple of Discipline My vision narrowed as we pulled into the driveway at the crew cabin in Breckenridge, Colorado. 

It was just after four in the morning and pitch-black. 

I could barely see as I stepped carefully down the short staircase leading to the front door. 

Kish watched me, concerned, as I entered the house under my own power. 

I was hurting but holding it together, and she knew I wouldn’t show any weakness in front of my team. 

In fact, she assumed I’d keep walking all the way through our bedroom on the ground floor and into the bathroom where she could help me get undressed and cleaned up. 

But the thin thread I’d been gripping tight to remain upright and presentable was fraying fast, and as soon as the guys were out of sight, it snapped. 

My knees buckled, and I fell to the bedroom floor. 

Kish was right behind me. 

She closed the door and locked it, ripped the cover off the bed, and spread it on the floor beside me. 

Then did her best to reposition me onto the bedspread to give me some semblance of comfort. 

She had no clue that her attentiveness made me anything but comfortable. 

Kish is such a neat freak she is borderline OCD. 

Dust, dirt, and the potential for germs get her radar pinging on high alert. 

She’s the first to comment when there is something foul in the air, and here I was smelling like an old dog who had rolled in roadkill. 

My legs and feet were covered in mud and blood, my fingernails rimmed with dirt. 

A paste of filth and sweat coated my skin from toe to scalp. 

My breath was rapid, rancid, and shallow, and the mild tremors that had only been visible to Kish in the car because she was paying close attention had become bone-rattling shivers. 

Then, my bowels groaned, and I knew it was about to get a whole lot worse. 

This was nothing new for me. 

Ever since my first ultra, the San Diego One Day, the aftermath of every 100-mile race I’d completed included a tidal wave of pain and suffering, along with a humiliating loss of control of my most basic bodily functions. 

Kish knew that, but she had never experienced it firsthand, and I was nervous she wouldn’t be able to handle it.  The two of us are very different people. 

Kish is not the outdoorsy type. 

If it weren’t for me, she never would have heard of Leadville. 

Her idea of fun is spending the day on a pickleball court or golf course or chilling at a five-star resort. 

She’s prissy. 

I’m a holdover beast from a different age, but when it comes to hard work and discipline, that’s where we marry up. 

She keeps up in the gym and on the roads and trails, is a hard-charger when it comes to business, and understands my dedication to the grind in a way that no other woman—no other person—in my life ever has. 

Yet, aside from that one night in the Nashville ER, she’d only ever seen me as capable of enduring and withstanding almost anything and everything with little to no help, and often on very little sleep. 

I’d rarely shown her any vulnerability, so how would she feel about me once she saw I wasn’t even capable of wiping myself? Ashamed and embarrassed, I told her what was about to go down, and she looked horrified. 

“Wait, David! Not on the duvet!” “The what?” I asked, delirious. 

“The duvet.” I must have looked confused because I’d never heard the word “duvet” in my entire life. 

“You know, the comforter goes inside the duvet.” Kish looked frazzled as she shook the snow-white linen beneath me, which, to her abject horror, was getting soaked through with my foul post-race marinade. 

“You’re lying on it right now!” “You mean the blanket?” I asked. 

She dashed out of the room without answering and returned with a black trash bag that she spread between me and the precious duvet like an open diaper. 

Only then did she tug my running shorts down to my thighs. 

My bowels unclenched, and an ungodly stench rose up around us. 

As predicted, she had to wipe my behind because I couldn’t move, and then she helped me up onto my knees so I could piss into some high-end decorative glass fruit bowl she’d found upstairs in the kitchen while she clenched her teeth and stressed about what this might do to her Airbnb rating.  After all of that, after she’d peeled the shoes and socks off my feet, cleaned me up the best she could, and cocooned me in that ridiculous duvet, my eyes rolled up behind my sagging eyelids. 

I wasn’t sleeping. 

I was attempting to savor the uncontrollable shivers, the filth, my own sick stench, and the many flavors of pain. 

The crushing agony in my hip flexors was searing. 

The only other time I’d ever felt anything like that was during the Wednesday night of my second Hell Week when I was rousted after a five-minute power nap on the beach. 

Everyone else on my boat crew was getting a full hour, but not me. 

Psycho Pete, the instructor I hated the most, wanted a private audience. 

I remember trying to stand up with that maniac in my face. 

It felt like my hips were trapped in a vice. 

The only thing that would have eased the throb was curling up in the fetal position, so that’s what I did in Breckenridge, tripping on how pain has the power to bring you back in time like nothing else. 

As I lay there, shivering and sweating at the same time, I could have sworn I was back on Coronado Island, getting wet and sandy. 

Kish was terrified. 

She watched me, timed my arrhythmic breaths, and listened to my bones rattle as she mapped out emergency contingencies in her head. 

Was I in shock? Was I having some sort of altitude reaction? Breckenridge is at 9,600 feet. 

She was concerned my condition could deteriorate fast. 

But I wasn’t worried about any of that. 

I knew that this was my old friend, breakdown. 

My final phase of ultra. 

When I first got into endurance events, I loved the breakdown phase because the suffering made me feel alive and reminded me that I’d gone all-out. 

This time, I didn’t relish it in the same way, but I knew that breakdown was a byproduct of an all-out effort and that if I explored the crevices of my mind, I would find valuable lessons, which tend to spill out with any unraveling. 

Most people prefer to avoid breakdowns like this because the suffering can be so overwhelming, it just might mark you forever. 

I embrace breakdown and welcome the scarring. 

There is a lot of information in scar tissue. 

Scars are proof that the past is real. 

Physical scars never go away, and when you look at them, they can bring you right back to a specific place in time. 

But the scar tissue that builds up around that old injury is weak. 

Professional fighters who’ve been hit in the face thousands of times bleed faster than those who have never been punched. 

Once you’ve been cut deep, you are forever vulnerable to bleeding.  The same is true for the mental and emotional scars that we all carry with us, the scars we cannot see. 

They might be invisible, but they affect us much more severely than physical scars. 

Mental and emotional scars are our weak spots, and they can open up just as easily as physical scars unless we do the work to strengthen them. 

If you haven’t dealt with your scars, they can alter your life’s path. 

You will be prone to failure during difficult physical and emotional situations, whether that’s during an athletic event, at work, or in your home life, and eventually, you will land back in front of your mirror that never lies. 

Breakdown is its own kind of mirror. 

Whatever you’re made of is laid out in front of you clear and plain. 

Your history and mindset become a weathered old map ridged with your scars, and if you read them like an archeologist on a dig, you might uncover the code you need to rise again and become better and stronger. 

Because there is no transformation without breakdown, and there is always another evolution, another skin to shed, a better or deeper version of ourselves waiting to be revealed. 

I did a quick inventory of my scars as I faded into that slippery headspace between waking and dreaming. 

Psycho Pete’s voice trailed off, and another familiar yet faint voice that I couldn’t quite place called out to me. 

“David, wake up…” My memory convulsed and bled into my reality, and I couldn’t tell where I was or what was real. 

“David,” he said, gruffly, louder this time. 

“Time to get up, boy!” It was the voice of my grandfather Sergeant Jack Gardner. 

Unlike those who embrace affectionate nicknames like Pop-Pop, Poppa, or Grandpa, he’d instructed me to call him Sgt. 

Jack, and that set the tone for how things were going to be between us. 

Oh yes, he left more than a few scars etched in my brain, and he was shaking me awake just like old times. 

***  It was the summer of 1983 when we staggered up his long gravel driveway and arrived on his doorstep under-slept, underfed, and with all our possessions crammed into black trash bags. 

My mother knocked on the door. 

While we waited, I scanned the yard. 

My grandparents had a big property—a full acre of land— including a wide, perfectly manicured lawn with train tracks running along one side. 

There wasn’t a blade of green grass out of place and not a single weed in sight. 

That should have been my first warning. 

While my dad was convinced that my grandparents had been behind our escape from Buffalo, he didn’t witness our arrival or my grandmother Morna’s wordless greeting on the front porch. 

She opened the door, rolled her eyes, and waved us inside. 

Sgt. 

Jack stood behind her with the expression of a drill instructor watching new recruits get off the bus with their long hair and beards, all wet behind the ears. 

He’d been a master sergeant in the Air Force and had retired years ago but was dressed in one of his flight suits. 

I didn’t recognize the look on his face because I was a disoriented young pup all covered in scar tissue, but when I went to boot camp for the first time, I saw it again. 

That day in Brazil, though, he looked like a hero to me. 

I smiled. 

He did not smile back. 

It felt good to be there anyway. 

I was happy to be anywhere but on Paradise Road, and they were relieved that we’d all gotten away from my father, but that didn’t mean room, board, and babysitting would be free. 

The first bill came due before dawn the next morning when I was awakened by a stiff shake of my shoulders. 

I opened my eyes, and there was Sgt. 

Jack, still in uniform. 

“Time to get up, boy,” he said. 

“There’s work to do.” I wiped my eyes and glanced at my brother, who shrugged. 

It was still dark outside, we were exhausted from the trip, and as soon as Sgt. 

Jack left the room, we fell back to sleep. 

The next wake-up call came in the form of glasses of cold water thrown in our faces. 

Two minutes later, we were in the garage where he kept his old metal desk from the military. 

On the corner of that desk was a yellow note pad. 

The top of the page was titled “Task List,” dated and marked “0530.” I had no clue what those numbers meant until Sgt. 

Jack explained that his house ran on military time. 

That was the moment I realized that there would be no adjustment period and no coddling whatsoever. 

My grandparents never expressed basic sympathy for what we had been through. 

Sgt. 

Jack simply stared hard, went over the list, and walked us through the garage as if we were his new employees and needed to know where to find the rakes, hoes, hedge clippers, and his quiver of brooms and dustpans and  how to operate and clean his manual lawn mower. 

He didn’t care how we divided up the work, just that we got up and got to it on time. 

Each day started like that. 

With an unwelcome wake-up call, an itemized, military-time-stamped task list, and few, if any, words from the old man. 

Sgt. 

Jack was half Black and half Native American, and though he was only five- foot-seven, he had a larger presence about him. 

He’d worked as a cook in the Air Force and still dressed in military attire every day. 

It was usually a flight suit or one of his Battle Dress Uniforms on weekdays. 

His crisp Dress Blues were reserved for church and all other formal occasions. 

Sgt. 

Jack took great pride in detailed stewardship. 

He cared about everything he owned. 

He had two separate two-car garages and four cars on the property, Cadillacs and Chevrolets from the midcentury. 

Like his well-tended house and garden, those cars were pristine. 

Born in 1905, he came of age in Southern Indiana during the height of Jim Crow, when it was dangerous to be a Black man in America and a wrong word or look could spark a lynch mob. 

His parents were poor, and he wasn’t babied as a kid. 

His formal education ended in the fourth grade when he had to get a job to help support the family. 

So, when I landed in his house, he passed along what he’d learned. 

What they’d taught him worked as far as he was concerned. 

He had a military pension. 

He owned his house free and clear, same with every car in his garages, and he had money in the bank. 

Sgt. 

Jack was squared away, and he got there with a self- reliance on detail and discipline. 

Each morning, before he woke me up, he walked the perimeter of his property, surveying the lawn, several trees, and the long unpaved driveway blanketed in snow-white gravel. 

The house had two porches, one on either side, and he liked them swept and his rain gutters cleared of debris at all times because storms come down hard in that part of the country. 

Sgt. 

Jack couldn’t stand seeing leaf litter, dust, or weeds. 

Everything had to be immaculate. 

The daily task list was always at least ten tasks long. 

Sometimes, it stretched to over twenty. 

The first order of business in the morning was to sweep both porches, front and back. 

After that, I had to get out the rake and collect and bag any stray leaves that had fallen overnight. 

In the spring and summer, that wasn’t a huge job, but in the fall, when the leaves turned, it took hours.  Hedges and grass grew like crazy during the humid Indiana summer, and that meant mowing the lawn manually in a perfect grid and clipping all the hedges almost daily. 

Weeds were always a problem in the summer, and as soon as they began poking through the gravel on the driveway, I had to get on my hands and knees and dig into the dirt to pull the roots free. 

The gravel dug into my skin, leaving scrapes and bruises. 

To me, it didn’t feel a whole lot different from scraping gum off the skate-rink floor at first. 

In those early weeks, I took Sgt. 

Jack’s tasks as a sign that no matter where I lived or who I lived with, I was bound to suffer at the hands of a bully. 

My scarred young mind was deep in the woe-is-me rinse cycle. 

So was my brother’s. 

He didn’t last long on Sgt. 

Jack detail and retreated to Buffalo pretty quickly. 

Crazy to think that Buffalo seemed like the better option. 

I wasn’t going anywhere, but that doesn’t mean I enjoyed it. 

At first, I despised the man and attempted to rebel. 

He’d come shake me awake, and I wouldn’t move. 

Then he’d splash water in my face, and I took that too. 

If I still didn’t get up, he’d come to my bedside with a metal trash can lid and whack it with a wooden spoon right next to my ear until I was up and on my way to the garage to pick up my orders. 

I didn’t yet realize that Sgt. 

Jack was no Trunnis. 

He was my Mr. 

Miyagi. 

Not in the sense that each chore came with specific instructions or that those instructions would manifest in skills that would deliver karate-tournament salvation. 

He never sat back and said, “I’m teaching you how to be a responsible young man.” Yet, I learned valuable life lessons. 

Many of us will meet people like Sgt. 

Jack in our lives, an elder or teacher who refuses to tell us what we want to hear in the way we want to hear it. 

When you’re emotionally scarred like I was, any and every hard look or gruff reply, any order or mandate, can feel like a personal attack, and oftentimes, we tune them out to our own detriment. 

It took me a long time to understand that there wasn’t anything personal about Sgt. 

Jack’s approach or his list. 

It was all transactional. 

His daughter—my mother—needed a place for us to stay, and in the real world, lodging isn’t free. 

As far as Sgt. 

Jack was concerned, that daily task list was the nightly bill to be paid. 

Not that my mom gave it a second thought. 

She was busy with a full load of classes at the local university and two part-time jobs, a schedule she’d keep for the next six years until she graduated with a master’s degree. 

The bill would have to be paid in my sweat.  Once school started, my work was divided into before- and after-school sessions, and there was rarely any respite. 

After I got home, schoolwork came first. 

Then, I had to complete all the tasks on the list correctly before I was allowed to play basketball with my friends. 

At first, I had no idea what doing a particular task correctly meant to the old man. 

The only direct feedback I got from him was a straight-faced nod, which meant he approved, or a shake of the head, which meant, “Try again.” I saw that a lot. 

His head shake of doom stalked me into my nightmares, where I would mow a lawn that never stopped growing out of control or attempt to clear rain gutters that were rimmed with saw-toothed blades that threatened to chop my fingers off. 

All things being equal, I preferred to be outside. 

I considered most of the house a no-go zone because as badly as I felt I was being treated by Sgt. 

Jack, I much preferred him to Morna. 

She was also of mixed race and could pass for White if or when she needed to. 

She celebrated that fact by spraying the N-word around like an Ecolab exterminator hunting for a hive of cockroaches. 

More often than not, her favorite word landed on my head. 

For all the racists I met in Brazil, nobody called me “nigger” more than sweet grandma Morna, which only heightened the feeling that I was their personal slave. 

Months passed, and the tyranny did not relent. 

By then, I knew exactly what Sgt. 

Jack expected from me. 

I knew how to cut the grass, rake the leaves, and wash the cars the way he wanted, but I felt sorry for myself because few, if any, of my friends had to do chores at all, let alone complete a daily, military-grade task list. 

Plus, my grandparents still hadn’t demonstrated any empathy for what I’d been through during the first eight years of my life. 

Clearly, they didn’t understand me. 

I was housed in their guestroom with dated furniture and wallpaper. 

I didn’t have basketball posters on the walls. 

I wasn’t given toys or cool sneakers or a stereo. 

Did they put out any effort to make that room more accommodating for a kid? No chance! And the only way I could get back at them was by doing a half-hearted job instead of working hard on the all- important tasks of the day. 

Of course, I was only victimizing myself.  If I wasn’t done before dinnertime, they’d call me in. 

The meals were not kid- friendly. 

There were no burgers or hot dogs. 

It was baked chicken or roast meats with sides of collard greens, chitlins, and cabbage. 

I was expected to clean my plate, whether I liked the food or not, and then go back out and finish whichever tasks remained undone. 

I often worked well past sundown. 

I couldn’t understand why my grandparents treated me this way. 

The only explanation my jacked-up eight-year-old brain could find was that, like my father, they hated me and resented my presence in their home. 

Which is why in the early days, earning Sgt. 

Jack’s checkmark of approval meant nothing to me, and I sleepwalked through his tasks like a zombie. 

I figured any attempt was good enough. 

Screw it, and screw him, I thought. 

I hated the old man and didn’t care what he thought of me. 

Six months later, though I still loathed the man, I changed my approach to the task list. 

I got up after the first wake-up call without delay. 

There would be no more early-morning baptisms for me. 

Instead, I focused on the details Sgt. 

Jack always noticed and finished each job right the first time. 

That was the only way I’d get any free time to play basketball. 

However, my new approach produced an unexpected side effect as well: a sense of pride in a job well done. 

In fact, that sense of pride came to mean more to me than basketball time. 

When I washed his car collection, a weekly assignment, I knew every drop of water had to be wiped away with a chamois before the first coat of wax. 

I used SOS pads to get the white walls gleaming and buffed out every panel. 

I also used Armor All on the dashboards and all the vinyl insides. 

I buffed the leather seats too. 

It bothered me if I saw streaks on the glass or chrome. 

I was annoyed if I missed a soiled spot or cut a corner here or there on any chore. 

I didn’t know it at the time, but that was a sign that I was actually healing. 

When a half-hearted job doesn’t bother you, it speaks volumes about the kind of person you are. 

And until you start feeling a sense of pride and self-respect in the work you do, no matter how small or overlooked those jobs might be, you will continue to sell yourself short. 

I knew I had every reason in the world to rebel and remain lazy. 

I also sensed that would only make me more miserable, so I adapted. 

But no matter how well I did or how fast I completed a given task, there were no atta’ boys or weekly allowance. 

No ice cream cones or surprise gifts, hugs, or high fives. 

In Sgt. 

Jack’s mind, I was finally doing what I should have been doing all along.  My grandparents weren’t ice-cold to everyone. 

When my cousin came to stay for Christmas in 1983, there were hugs and kisses aplenty from both Morna and Sgt. 

Jack because, unlike my mother, his mom insisted they treat her child with affection, not military discipline. 

The gifts piled up too. 

There were toys and clothes and a barbecue where burgers and hot dogs were grilled to order, followed by bowls full of ice cream. 

Whatever he wanted and whenever he wanted it, my cousin got it. 

“David, come on over here for a minute,” Sgt. 

Jack said while I eyeballed my cousin Damien as he scarfed down his bowl of ice cream. 

He’d been there for two days and had enjoyed more ice cream than I had in six months. 

“I have a gift for you too.” I followed him, almost shocked, until it became clear we were headed out into the garage as usual. 

Evidently, it was time to find out what a Christmas-morning task list looked like. 

Christmas was no different than the average Wednesday to my grandfather. 

He didn’t care if it was your birthday or any other holiday. 

The work would not stop. 

I grabbed the sheet of paper off his desk as he wheeled over my Christmas present. 

It was a shiny new manual lawnmower with my initials monogrammed on the gleaming stainless-steel wheel hubs. 

There was snow on the ground, so I knew I didn’t need to mow the lawn that morning, but there had been a sale on yard equipment at Western Auto, and the old man never could pass up a sale. 

“Merry Christmas,” he said with a grin. 

My cousin was being treated like a prince, and the old man brought me out to the garage to troll me. 

I guess I’ve had a lot of Merry Christmases in my life. 

Two separate events would soon change how I saw Sgt. 

Jack forever. 

In the new year, my mom and I moved into our subsidized seven-dollar-a-month apartment in Lamplight Manor. 

The following summer, she enrolled me in summer school down the road. 

One day, after class let out, I walked home with a group of kids who lived nearby. 

One of them, a little girl named Meredith, lived down the street, and we covered the last stretch together. 

Her father happened to be sitting on their front porch drinking a beer when we got to her house, and as soon as he saw me, he put that beer down, leaned forward, stroked his beard, and glared at me like a mad dog.  Mind you, while my grandmother called me the N-word, I had never experienced any racism in public before. 

I simply thought he was mad at his daughter when he barked, “Meredith, get inside!” I didn’t think his stress had anything to do with me. 

Later that evening, he called my mom and warned her that he was in the Ku Klux Klan. 

“Tell your son to leave my daughter alone,” he said. 

After she told him to go to hell, he said he would pay Sgt. 

Jack a visit. 

Everyone knew Sgt. 

Jack in Brazil, Indiana. 

He was friends with the mayor and other local leaders, who all considered him to be a churchgoing patriot, a man of God and his word. 

He was proof that the American Dream was real, and in the minds of many racist White boys in Brazil, he was one of “the good ones.” Clearly, this fool thought Sgt. 

Jack would straighten her and me out. 

My mom smiled at the thought. 

“Please do,” she said. 

Then she hung up and called her father. 

When I saw Meredith’s dad again a few days later, he was on my grandparents’ front porch. 

He’d come by unannounced, but Sgt. 

Jack was prepared. 

He looped his pistol through his belt and wore it like a sidearm when he opened his front door. 

I was huddled inside behind my grandfather and around a corner but had a clear view when Meredith’s father noticed Sgt. 

Jack’s weapon and backed up a step. 

Sgt. 

Jack raised his chin another inch, looked the man dead in the eye, but didn’t say a word. 

“Look, Jack,” the Klansman began, “if your grandson doesn’t stop walking home from school with my daughter, we are going to have some problems.” “The only problem we’re gonna have,” Sgt. 

Jack said, “is a dead Klansman on my front porch if you don’t get off my property.”  I ran to the door in time to watch that man turn around, get back in his truck, and drive off. 

Then I looked over at Sgt. 

Jack, who nodded. 

It was the first time any adult had protected me from harm. 

A few months later, I was in the driveway with Sgt. 

Jack and his friend Bill while they worked on my grandfather’s Cadillac. 

Those two tinkered with cars almost every day. 

If they weren’t changing spark plugs or checking oil, Sgt. 

Jack was flushing a radiator or steam cleaning an engine. 

When the day’s job was done, Bill slammed the steel hood down without realizing Sgt. 

Jack’s hands were still resting on the rim. 

The hood shattered fingers on both of his hands, but he didn’t make a sound. 

“Bill, lift the hood,” he said, calmly, still in complete control. 

The blood drained from Bill’s face when he realized what he’d done. 

He was so shook, it took a few seconds for him to jiggle the hood’s release. 

When he finally got it, Sgt. 

Jack pulled his bloody hands free, walked calmly into the house, and found my grandmother. 

“Morna,” he said, “I think you’d better drive me to the hospital.” Witnessing that changed me. 

I’d never been around such strength and composure. 

I didn’t even know something like that was possible, and I thought if I could be as tough as him one day, all of the suffering at the hands of my father, the shoveling snow and gravel, the raking leaves and washing cars, the cleaning rain gutters, the clipping hedges, and the lawn mowing would be worth it. 

I was still struggling to learn, to trust, to feel good about myself, and to find meaning in all the pain, but by seeing how Sgt. 

Jack handled that situation, I learned that being tough could be my way out. 

I don’t mean my way out of Brazil. 

That wasn’t top of mind yet. 

I was looking for a way out of my fragile, wounded state of mind. 

There’s an old saying in the military, that “if you are stupid, you better be hard.” Back then, I considered myself stupid. 

Partly because all that scar tissue was still so fresh it was hard to focus on my schoolwork, and my response was simply to be lazy. 

If I failed because I didn’t try, did I really fail? Then, I learned to cheat my way through. 

Sgt. 

Jack’s way didn’t involve whining, scheming, or feeling sorry for yourself. 

He was about gritting his teeth, taking pride in everything he did, and dealing head-on with whatever came  his way. 

For longer than I could remember, I’d felt neglected and ignored. 

I was bitter when my friends and cousin could play when they wanted to, watch television all day, and wear fresh gear to school. 

When would I ever get mine, I wondered? When would I get something for me and me alone? That day in the driveway was when I finally figured out that Sgt. 

Jack’s example was the gift I’d been hoping for all along. 

It was more impressive and satisfying than any present could be, tastier than any hamburger or hot dog, and sweeter than an ice cream sundae. 

It was the best and most important day in my miserable life so far.  With my Mr. 

Miyagi Sgt. 

Jack was a hard teacher, but kids need hard teachers sometimes. 

I know that might hurt your ears because things are different now. 

We are warned of the lasting  effects of stress on children, and to compensate, parents strategize about how to make their children’s lives comfortable and easy. 

But is the real world always comfortable? Is it easy? Life is not G-rated. 

We must prepare kids for the world as it is. 

Our generation is training kids to become full-fledged members of Entitlement Nation, which ultimately makes them easy prey for the lions among us. 

Our ever- softening society doesn’t just affect children. 

Adults fall into the same trap. 

Even those of us who have achieved great things. 

Every single one of us is just another frog in the soon-to-be-boiling water that is our soft culture. 

We take unforeseen obstacles personally. 

We are ready to be outraged at all times by the evil ways of the world. 

Believe me, I know all about evil and have dealt with more of it than most, but if you catalog your scars to use them as excuses or a bargaining chip to make life easier for yourself, you’ve missed an opportunity to become better and grow stronger. 

Sgt. 

Jack knew what awaited me as an adult. 

He was preparing me for the grip of life. 

Whether he knew it or not, the man was training me to be a savage. 

The evolutionary equation is the exact same for everybody. 

It doesn’t matter who you are. 

You could be a young person looking to tap into your power and become great or a mid-life adult or senior who’s never done a darn thing but wants to achieve something before it’s too late. 

Or maybe you’ve achieved a lot but are overcoming injury or illness or are simply uninspired and caught in emotional and physical quicksand. 

First, you must recognize that you have fallen off or are perpetually falling short. 

Next, accept that you are on your own. 

Nobody will come save you. 

They may show you an example, like Sgt. 

Jack did for me and I’m doing for you right now, but it will be up to you to do the work. 

Then, you must become a disciple of discipline. 

Even after we moved into our own place, whenever my mom had to work late or go out of town, I’d spend the night at Sgt. 

Jack’s, and sure enough, there would be a wake-up call and a bill in the morning in the form of a task list. 

And yes, like my dad, Sgt. 

Jack was a mean old man who expected me to do as he said and work for free, but unlike Trunnis, he wrapped something valuable in the discipline he served, and whenever I put maximum focus to each task, I earned a sense of pride that I hadn’t been able to find anyplace else. 

But it didn’t last.  Eventually, I grew into a rebellious teenager. 

I sagged my pants down, flipped the middle finger at authority, and was well on my way to flunking out. 

I had become a punk, but Sgt. 

Jack didn’t try to tell me how to dress or act, beyond insisting that, when I come across an adult, I had better greet them with “sir” and “ma’am.” And though he knew about each and every racial taunt and episode of vandalism I endured, he had no intention of stepping in to fight my battles anymore. 

I was almost grown, and they were my storms to navigate. 

Not his. 

Like many disaffected teenagers, I wasn’t living a mission-driven life. 

I was merely existing. 

I had become lazy, and my attention to detail was long gone because I didn’t have that guy looking over my shoulder on a daily basis to keep me on point. 

The feeling of pride that I had back in the day working Sgt. 

Jack’s property was nowhere to be found, but nobody considered this to be any kind of emergency. 

I was only seventeen, and even then, it was normal to give young kids plenty of space to do a whole lot of nothing much. 

We’ve all heard parents say, “He is only a teenager,” or, “She’s only in college,” when explaining away bad habits or poor choices. 

The question is, when is the right time to start living instead of merely existing? My time came when I received a letter informing me that my failing grades would keep me from graduating high school, which would also end my career in the Air Force before it started. 

The next day, I went back to Sgt. 

Jack and began staying over at his place more often. 

I asked for his task lists. 

I wanted to work in his yard. 

I craved discipline because I had a sense it might save me. 

That’s the beauty of discipline. 

It trumps everything. 

A lot of us are born with minimal talent, unhappy in our own skin and with the genetic makeup with which we were born. 

We have messed-up parents, grow up bullied and abused, or are diagnosed with learning disabilities. 

We hate our hometown, our teachers, our families, and nearly everything about ourselves. 

We wish we could be born again as someone else in some other time and place. 

Well, I am proof that rebirth is possible through discipline, which is the only thing capable of altering your DNA. 

It is the skeleton key that can get you past all the gatekeepers and into each and every room you wish to enter. 

Even the ones built to keep you out! It’s so easy to be great nowadays because so many people are focused on efficiency: getting the most for themselves with the least amount of time and effort.  Let all of them leave the gym early, skip school, take sick days. 

Commit to becoming the one person with a never-ending task list. 

This is where you make up the difference in potential. 

By learning to maximize what you do have, you will not only level the playing field but also surpass those born with more natural ability and advantages than you. 

Let your hours become days, then weeks, then years of effort. 

Allow discipline to seep into your cells until work becomes a reflex as automatic as breathing. 

With discipline as your medium, your life will become a work of art. 

Discipline builds mental endurance because when effort is your main priority, you stop looking for everything to be enjoyable. 

Our phones and social media have turned too many of us inside out with envy and greed as we get inundated with other people’s success, their new cars and houses, big contracts, resort vacations, and romantic getaways. 

We see how much fun everyone else is having and feel like the world is passing us by, so we complain about it and then wonder why we are not where we want to be. 

When you become disciplined, you don’t have time for that. 

Your insecurities become alarm bells reminding you that doing your chores or homework to the utmost of your ability and putting in extra time on the job or in the gym are requirements for a life well-lived. 

A drive for self-optimization and daily repetition will build your capacity for work and give you confidence that you can take on more. 

With discipline as your engine, your workload and output will double, then triple. 

What you won’t see, at least not at first, is the fact that your own personal evolution has begun to bear fruit. 

You won’t see it because you’ll be too busy taking action. 

Discipline does not have a belief system. 

It transcends class, color, and gender. 

It cuts through all the noise and strife. 

If you think that you are behind the eight ball for whatever reason, discipline is the great equalizer. 

It erases all disadvantages. 

Nowadays, it doesn’t matter where you are from or who you are; if you are disciplined, there will be no stopping you. 

Believe me, I know none of that comes easy. 

I struggled to get up before the sun on that first morning back on Sgt. 

Jack detail. 

I hadn’t dealt with a 0500 wake-up call in so long, it felt too sudden. 

I was lethargic as the bed sucked me back into its  cushy arms. 

The pull to stay lazy was stronger than it had ever been. 

That’s how it works when you’re trying to change. 

The call to remain complacent will only grow louder until you silence it with a pattern of behavior that leaves no doubt about your mission. 

Lucky for me, I knew the stakes were too high to fall into that trap, so high that I didn’t have time to wake up slowly. 

I needed to knock out my chores before school so I could hit the books after I got home. 

Still drowsy and dragging, I remembered that whenever I ran or played ball, I felt better afterward. 

I was just a dumb kid. 

I didn’t know anything about the science of endorphins and how they trigger an energized and positive feeling in the body and brain after a workout. 

But I knew how I felt, and that was enough. 

I dropped down and hit a max set of push-ups. 

By the time I was done, I had the energy I needed to run to the garage, grab my task list, and get to work. 

That became my new pattern. 

Wake up earlier than I had to, do my max set of push-ups, and then get cracking. 

It was during those days of struggle and striving, when I didn’t know if I would actually graduate or be accepted by the Air Force, that I first realized I am at my best when I am a disciple of discipline. 

The further I got away from it, and from Sgt. 

Jack, the worse I became. 

While I still didn’t like waking up early or most of the chores I had to do, those were the very things that turned me into someone I could be proud of. 

I also knew Sgt. 

Jack wouldn’t always be around to lead by example. 

He was already in his late eighties and had started to slow down. 

Old age had crept up on him. 

He slept much more and didn’t move very well, which meant it was time to learn how to hold myself accountable. 

His task lists had taught me how to prioritize and attack each day with a plan of action, so I started getting up before him. 

I’d do my push-ups, walk the perimeter of his property well before dawn, and assess what needed to be done. 

By the time he was at his desk sipping coffee, I was already working. 

Once he saw that I took the initiative to not only do the tasks that would normally be on the list but identify additional work to be done, his lists shrank and then disappeared altogether. 

At home, Sgt. 

Jack’s task lists evolved into my Accountability Mirror, which helped me build the habits necessary to graduate on time, pass the ASVAB, and enlist in the Air Force.  From then on, whenever I had a purpose or a task in front of me, I didn’t consider it done until I’d completed it to the best of my ability. 

When that’s the way you live your life, you no longer need a task list or an Accountability Mirror because when you see the grass is high, you cut the grass right then. 

If you’re lagging behind in school or work, you study harder or stay late and take care of business. 

When it came time to lose one hundred pounds to become a SEAL, I knew exactly what I had to do. 

I had to tap back into being a disciple of discipline, but I didn’t need a task list. 

Writing it down would have only cut into my workout time, and I didn’t have a single minute to spare. 

Once, those task lists were a burden. 

Today, I burn with an inner drive shaped by doing the things I didn’t want to do over and over again. 

And it won’t let me relax until I’ve done what needs to be done every day. 

My post-Leadville breakdown was physically challenging yet mentally exhilarating because it allowed me to bask in the power of my mind. 

The hard work it took to get back to the starting line of Leadville demanded that I go back to being the disciple of discipline Sgt. 

Jack helped create. 

Granted, I still don’t know what his objective was. 

Was he trying to shine a path forward and make me better, or did he just want free labor? In the end, it didn’t matter. 

It was up to me to interpret why he did it, what it meant, and spin it to create forward momentum. 

It will always be up to you to find the lesson in every challenging situation and use it to become stronger, wiser, and better. 

No matter what comes down on your head, you must find a glimmer of light, remain positive, and never treat yourself as a victim. 

Especially if you intend to thrive in a harsh world where you have to work for everything that matters. 

I’m not talking about material things. 

I’m talking about self-respect, self-love, and self-mastery. 

Minutes before waking up to the morning after Leadville, rank as could be, with my foul shorts still looped around my thighs, I flashed to one of the last times I saw Sgt. 

Jack alive. 

It was at my graduation from basic training in the Air Force. 

In spite of his poor health, he was adamant about attending, and as a World War II vet, he was given a VIP seat on the dais among the brass.  All the years I knew him, he’d never said, “Good job,” to me. 

I never once heard him say, “I love you.” But when they announced my name and I marched across that stage in my Dress Blues to officially become an airman like him, we locked eyes, and I watched one solitary tear snake down his cheek. 

Sgt. 

Jack was beaming, and it was obvious that he was proud as hell to be my grandfather.  Me and Sgt. 

Jack at graduation from basic training.     Evolution No. 

5 These are the facts, and they are undisputed. 

Your problems and your past aren’t on anybody else’s agenda. 

Not really. 

You may have a few people in your inner circle who care about what you’re going through, but for the most part, no one cares that much because they’re dealing with their own issues and focused on their own lives. 

I learned that the hard way. 

On our drive from Buffalo to 117 South McGuire Street in Brazil, Indiana when I was eight years old, I assumed I was going to walk into the biggest pity party of all time. 

I expected balloons, cake, ice cream, and big warm hugs. 

Instead, it was as if all the pain and terror never happened. 

Sgt. 

Jack didn’t deal in pity. 

He was out to harden my shell, and that’s exactly what he did. 

Pity is a soothing balm that turns toxic. 

At first, when your family and friends commiserate with you and validate the reasons you have for grumbling about your circumstances, it lands like sympathy. 

But the more comfort pity brings you, the more external validation you’ll crave and the less independent you will become. 

Which will make it that much more difficult for you to gain any traction in life. 

That’s the vicious cycle of pity. 

It saps self-esteem and inner strength, which makes it harder to succeed, and with each subsequent failure, you will be more tempted to pity yourself. 

Look, I get it. 

Life isn’t fair or easy. 

A lot of us are doing a job that we don’t want to do. 

We feel we are above the tasks coming our way and that the world, or God, or the fates have sentenced us to live in a box we do not belong in. 

When I was a night-shift security guard at a local hospital, I felt that work was beneath me, so I showed up every night with a voice in my head screaming, I don’t want to be here! And that infected everything about my life. 

I ate my feelings, blew up, and slipped into a deep depression. 

I wanted a different life, but my bad attitude made it impossible to create one. 

Every minute you spend feeling sorry for yourself is another minute not getting better, another morning you miss at the gym, another evening wasted without studying. 

Another day burned when you didn’t make any progress toward your dreams, ambitions, and deepest desires. 

The ones you’ve had in your head and heart  your entire life. 

Every minute you spend feeling sorry for yourself is another minute spent in the dungeon thinking about what you lost or the opportunities that have been snatched away or squandered, which inevitably leads to the Great Depression. 

When you are depressed, you are likely to believe that nobody understands you or your plight. 

I used to think that way. 

But when Sgt. 

Jack banged that trash can lid inches from my ear in the morning, he was telling me I wasn’t the only little boy who got whipped or suffered from toxic stress. 

Sometimes, the emotions we feel are a product of a horrible past. 

Sometimes, we just don’t want to get up at 0500 and do hours of chores before school because it sucks. 

Sgt. 

Jack expected me to perform no matter what I’d been through or what time it was. 

In response, my feelings got hurt. 

I stalled getting out of bed until the last possible moment and slouched my way through my mornings as part of a mindless, mopey rebellion. 

He didn’t care. 

That grass still needed to be cut, the leaves needed to be raked, and the weeds needed to be pulled. 

No matter how much I belly-ached, this work needed to get done, and it would get done by me. 

My feelings were costing me a ton of time because no matter how I felt, there was a task in front of me, and that’s all that mattered in the present moment. 

The only thing that ever matters is the present moment. 

Yet too many people let their depression or regret hijack their day. 

They let their feelings about the past hijack their lives. 

Perhaps their fiancé left them at the altar, or they got fired without cause. 

Guess what? One day, they will pan back and realize that nobody cared about any of that but them. 

I don’t care what you’ve been through. 

I can feel bad for you. 

I can have sympathy for you, but my sympathy won’t get you anywhere. 

When I was a young, damaged kid, feeling sorry for myself didn’t help me. 

What helped was cleaning those whitewalls right the first time. 

We cannot get time back, so we must be minute hoarders. 

The earlier I get up, the more I do. 

The less time I stay in pity-party-feel-sorry-for-myself land, the stronger I become and the more daylight I see between me and everyone else. 

When you separate yourself from the pack by cultivating the values and priorities that lead to greatness, mountains of adversity and hardship become speed bumps, and that makes it easier to adapt to the road ahead and build the new life or sense of self you crave.  When I went to live with Sgt. 

Jack, I was forced to adapt extremely fast. 

Everyone was hard on me my whole life, but I came out of all that with lessons learned that stuck with me. 

Those who learn to adapt survive and thrive. 

Don’t feel sorry for yourself. 

Get strategic. 

Attack the problem. 

When you adapt, you will begin to see everything that comes your way as a stepping stone on your progression toward a higher plane. 

High-paying, esteemed jobs are generally not entry level. 

You have to start somewhere, but most people see the thankless tasks that must be completed in order to advance as burdens instead of opportunities. 

That makes it impossible for them to learn. 

You’ve got to find the lesson in every menial task or low-wage job. 

That requires humility. 

I wasn’t humble enough to appreciate my experience in security, so my attitude was foul. 

I thought I deserved much better, oblivious to the fact that almost everybody starts at the bottom and, from there, it’s attitude and action that determine the future. 

Humility is the antidote to self-pity. 

It keeps you rooted in reality and your emotions in check. 

I’m not suggesting you should be satisfied with an entry-level job. 

I’m never satisfied, but you must appreciate what you have while staying hungry enough to learn everything you can. 

You need to learn to wash the dishes, flip the burgers, sweat over the deep fryer, sweep up the job site, work in the mailroom, and answer the phones. 

That’s how you build proficiency. 

It’s important to learn every aspect of any business before you move up. 

You can’t rise if you’re weighed down by bitterness and entitlement. 

Humility hardens your spine and encourages you to stand tall, secure in yourself no matter what anyone else thinks. 

And that has tremendous value. 

I once heard a story about a Master Sergeant in the Army named William Crawford that exemplifies the power of humility. 

He retired in 1967 and took a job as a janitor at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs. 

The cadets he cleaned up after paid him little mind, in part because he was reportedly painfully shy but also because these cadets were elite students on an officer track, and Master Sergeant Crawford was just a janitor. 

Or so they thought. 

They had no clue that he was also a war hero. 

In September 1943, the 36th Infantry Division was getting blitzed by German machine-gun fire and mortars during a pivotal World War II battle for a piece of Italian real estate known as Hill 424. 

The Americans were pinned down with no escape route until Crawford spied three machine-gun nests and crawled beneath rivers of bullets to toss a grenade into each of them. 

His bravery saved lives and  allowed his company to advance to safe ground, and after the third direct hit, the Germans abandoned Hill 424, but not before they took Crawford prisoner. 

Presumed to be killed in action, tales of his heroism spread among infantrymen and traveled up the chain of command. 

In 1944, he was awarded the Medal of Honor, the highest decoration in the U.S. 

military. 

Because everyone thought he was dead, his father accepted the medal on his behalf. 

Later that same year, he was found in a liberated POW camp, oblivious to the hype surrounding his name. 

In 1976, an Academy cadet and his roommate read about that battle and connected the dots. 

Their humble janitor had won the Medal of Honor! Can you imagine what went through their heads? The Medal of Honor speaks to everything a military person reveres. 

Not the medal itself, but the courage and selflessness inside the human being who earned that medal. 

Those students wanted to be him, and there he was, mopping their floors and cleaning their bathrooms every day. 

Master Sergeant Crawford was a walking lesson in self-esteem, courage, character, and, especially, humility. 

The way I see it, Master Sergeant William Crawford had figured it out. 

The Medal of Honor didn’t change him. 

He rose to prominence by staying humble and risking his own life to save others and retired into the service of others. 

It was never about him, and that gave him strength. 

People who feel sorry for themselves are obsessed with their own problems and their own fate. 

Is that really much different than the greedy and egotistical people who want to feel better than everybody else? The higher I climb in my life, the more I realize how much I need to mop that floor. 

Because that’s where all the knowledge is. 

There is no grit at the top, no tests of resolve in steak dinners, five- star hotels, or spa treatments. 

Once you make it in this world, you have to freefall back to the bottom in some way to keep learning and growing. 

I call this “trained humility.” It’s a shedding of your skin that allows you to take on a mission that no one else can see and do whatever needs to be done next. 

Trained humility is service but also strength. 

Because, when you are humble enough to remember that you’ll never know it all, each lesson you learn only makes you hungrier to learn more, and that will put you on a path that guarantees you will grow all the way to the grave.  Continued growth only comes when you are willing to be humble. 

#TrainedHumility #NeverFinished Chapter Six    6. 

The Art of Getting Hit in the Mouth Leadville reminded me of what I’d been missing in my life for way too long: the steep trails, the waves of pain and exhaustion, and yet another cage match with my own demons. 

I appreciated having a pacer and being able to share the experience with Kish for the first time. 

I even relished the aftermath, and I left Colorado wanting more. 

The following week, I helped my mom move from Nashville to Las Vegas. 

On the twenty-six-hour drive, I had plenty of time to complete my After Action Report and review each aspect of the race. 

One thing about Leadville that I kept coming back to was how much bigger the sport of ultra running had become since my heyday. 

Back then, 100-milers were run by hard-core endurance athletes like me who sought deeper water. 

That no longer seemed to be the case. 

There was great beauty in that. 

It was evidence that more people were digging deeper. 

They were curious. 

They craved more self-knowledge and were willing to pay the toll in pain and suffering. 

I respected that, but if one hundred miles had become accessible, where was the new deep end? That thought both excited and unnerved me because it implied that, despite all I’d done in the past, there was still more to give and a lot further to go. 

I knew that, of course. 

I preach it all the time, but now I felt it like a slap in the face I didn’t see coming. 

It’s funny how our goals are only as elastic as our sense of self, of who we are and what we think we can accomplish. 

If all you’ve ever done is run three miles at a clip, then a ten-mile run can feel as far as the moon. 

Your mind will compile reasons why that distance is beyond you, and you may believe them. 

If ten becomes the new normal, then a half or full marathon may be the next step. 

After a marathon comes ultra. 

Each time you level up, your mind will step in like an overbearing chaperone and try to shut down the party. 

That very dynamic was playing out in my own mind on the long drive. 

I flashed to a thirty-mile run I’d done with Cameron Hanes in Oregon back in December 2018. 

While we hammered the trails around his hometown, he gushed  about a brand-new race he’d finished two months earlier. 

It wasn’t a 100-miler. 

It was a 240.3-mile trail race with nearly thirty thousand feet of elevation gain (that’s more than the elevation of Mount Everest) among the red-rock formations, sheer drop-offs, and desolated peaks of Moab, Utah. 

Two hundred and forty miles? Was that the new deep end? When I was learning to swim as a teenager, I spent all my time in the shallow end of the pool because there was no fear there. 

Even after I’d become proficient, I swam laps in the shallow end because it soothed me knowing that with each stroke, I almost scraped bottom. 

If I got too tired or wanted to quit, I could simply stand up, and that gave me both comfort and confidence. 

It allowed me to work on my stroke without fear getting in the way. 

There is nothing inherently wrong with that, as long as we are clear that the shallow-end work we put in is all about preparation for the deep end. 

But that was not my mindset at that point in my life. 

The way the pool complex was laid out made it impossible to ignore the deep end. 

Each day I left the locker room, I had to walk by the ten-foot section. 

Occasionally, I stepped to the ledge and looked down. 

That ten-foot floor felt bottomless to me, so I tucked tail and strolled toward the cozy little three-foot marker. 

With each step, my dread faded while my comfort swelled, and that played with my psyche. 

I did my best to clear it out of my mind as I swam, but it lodged in there like a thorn, lap after lap, day after day. 

When something continually looms in the back of your mind like a taunting, that’s an alarm. 

It’s a signal that you need to evaluate and address that issue, or it may become a life-long fear, looming larger each day until it morphs into an obstacle you may never overcome. 

There is nothing wrong with being afraid or hesitant. 

We all have our reasons for remaining in the shallow end, but we must make our shallow end a training ground. 

Too often, we treat our training terrain as a La-Z- Boy. 

We lay back, get comfy, and then have the audacity to wonder why our lives aren’t getting any better while we do the same things we’ve always done. 

I should have been using my time in the shallow end as mental preparation, imagining deep water with every stroke. 

You have to train your mind as if you are already there. 

If you get tired while swimming laps in the shallow end, don’t give yourself the option of standing up in the middle of the lane. 

Your only resting point should be the gunnel at the other end of the pool. 

That way, when you get to the ten-foot end, you know from experience that you can make the distance. 

But back then, I was merely a survivor. 

I wasn’t a warrior capable of thriving in discomfort, so I chose to bury my dread and logged  my pool hours in the shallows with no end in sight. 

A lot of us grow out of life’s shallow end but stay there because we fear the unknown. 

I’m thinking of those who remain in a secure job they hate instead of cutting ties and starting up their own business or applying for a new position elsewhere. 

Most are intimidated by an unknown future filled with variables and consequences they can’t control or foresee. 

I know a person who ran other people’s thriving businesses for twenty years but was afraid to run her own. 

She knew every aspect of what it took to become a successful entrepreneur, but rather than acknowledge her experience and use it as a confidence supply, she let her irrational fears keep her running in place for someone else. 

You need to evaluate what you are feeling. 

Not every emotion deserves to be ratified. 

Remember, if you stay where you’ve always been, you will never learn if you have what it takes to venture into the deep water. 

I felt a glimmer of that old foreboding as we zoomed through the Southwest on the way to Nevada with Moab on my mind. 

I shook my head in disbelief. 

Was my mind still trying to stop me after all these years? I thought I’d tamed that monster. 

And I had, but Moab 240 was something entirely new for me, so fear was a natural response. 

By then, I knew that there were no tricks around fear. 

The only way to neutralize it was to commit to doing the thing that freaked me out and then proceed to outsmart my fear through knowledge and preparation. 

That night, I googled the race and surveyed the course. 

It was a roller coaster, traveling up and down from four thousand feet in elevation to 10,500 feet and back again. 

The weather would be unpredictable, with the potential to deliver serious heat and extreme cold. 

The distances between aid stations, ranging from nine to nineteen miles, were more than in any other event I had ever done, so I would have to haul a lot more gear than I did for Leadville. 

The suck factor would be high, but you had 110 hours to finish, which meant you could break it up if you wanted to. 

A lot of people did, but that’s not how I tackle these events. 

I run straight through and tempt the course to reveal just how fit I am, physically and mentally. 

On August 23, I emailed race headquarters in Moab and inquired about signing up. 

I received a reply within twenty-four hours. 

The race was scheduled for early October, and I could still apply for a spot. 

That gave me six weeks to train, and those weeks were already packed with multiple speaking gigs, work commitments, and a lot of travel. 

All good. 

I’d find the time to put in the 100-mile weeks required to be ready for the longest run of my career.  Race day was on us in a blink. 

I gathered with 108 runners from all over the world before dawn on October 11 in Moab, Utah. 

Some pumped their fists. 

Others high- fived. 

They were trying to get motivated to take on hell as if getting happy would insulate them from the reality of what they’d signed up for. 

That’s not me. 

When I toe the line, I get real quiet. 

Almost like I’m filing into a funeral. 

I know the race will bleed the life out of all of us, some more than others, so I grieve for the misery to come. 

Right up until the horn sounds. 

As usual, my leg muscles started out tight. 

While they were stronger and in better condition than they’d been going into Leadville, my knees were sore. 

Especially my left knee. 

During training, it had gotten to the point where I could barely step off a curb without cringing. 

It took thirty minutes of hobbling before I loosened up enough to find my stride. 

That became normal. 

The pain always faded to manageable, and my range of motion tended to kick in once I was warmed up, but I had never run 240 miles in one chunk before. 

Would my knees last that long? Moab 240 was a different animal in many ways. 

It wasn’t simply the distance or altitude. 

The course was a single loop—a network of singletrack trails, sloping rock, open desert, and fire roads—but it wasn’t fully marked, so we had to download and mind a particular GPS app on our phones to make sure we stayed on course. 

Also, we were required to carry a survival kit along with our other gear because there were sections that were inaccessible to our crews or race staff. 

We had to be able to fend for ourselves and navigate in the wild. 

This was more than a race. 

It was a true adventure. 

My initial test came right after meeting up with my crew for the first time at mile 17.8, where I stopped long enough to stuff my pack with everything I’d need for the next fifty-five miles. 

Although there would be aid stations, they were not accessible to crews, which meant I wouldn’t see mine again until mile seventy-two. 

I grabbed gels, powders, extra food and batteries, and a back-up headlamp. 

I had a 1.5-liter bladder zipped into my pack and two water bottles slotted into the pack’s shoulder pockets. 

But what made the next ten hours so hard wasn’t the length or the extra weight. 

It was the temperature. 

The first seventy-two miles of the course ran across a blend of terrain. 

At times, we were on trails, but without warning, the trail would disappear from under our feet, and I’d find myself running down a sloping rock face wondering where it went.  Early on, there was a cluster of ten of us or so out there, our heads on a swivel, checking the app to see if our blinking triangle was still on the dotted line. 

After four or five hours, we were all strung out, and then, it was just me, out there alone, navigating on the run. 

I didn’t mind being alone because it kept me thinking, and the complex terrain demanded that I keep my situational awareness (SA) way up. 

I dialed in my nutrition and hydration, making sure to eat and drink at planned intervals regardless of how good I felt. 

Any blip in the trail, any potential wrong turn, made me stop and locate where I was and where I needed to be. 

Sometimes, the cross-country sections lasted a mile or longer. 

Other times, we were on a distinct trail or road for hours. 

I was running well, and all was going according to plan until I passed the fifty-mile mark. 

That’s when the desert turned cold. 

The sun was still up, but the wind was unseasonably crisp, and that was bad news. 

I have a condition called Raynaud’s phenomenon. 

In cold weather, the blood flow to my extremities becomes restricted, and blood pools in my core. 

Back when I was stationed in Chicago and running ultras almost every weekend, I ran during the brutal Chicago winter armed with two layers of thin gloves beneath a pair of ski gloves. 

Over all of that, I’d pull on thick wool socks, and even then, my hands would be jacked up. 

I bought a pair of battery-powered, heated gloves just before my Frozen Otter race in 2014, which kept my hands at normal body temperature and enabled my blood to keep flowing. 

I won that race in part because of those gloves. 

I brought those same heated gloves with me to Utah, but Moab in early October wasn’t supposed to be anywhere close to as cold as mid-winter in Chicago, and because I had to carry all my own gear and was due to see my crew again at mile 72.3 not long after sunset, I didn’t think it made sense to pack the gloves and the bulky batteries. 

My strategy for races like this has always been to keep everything simple and light. 

I race streamlined. 

I hadn’t guessed my fingers would stiffen up from the cold with the sun still out. 

I knew they might soon become useless, so I stopped, pulled on a pair of thin gloves —which were essentially glove liners—removed my bladder from my pack, and secured it against my chest. 

I’d had the bladder and drinking hose freeze up in races before—including at Frozen Otter—and I couldn’t afford to be dehydrated and freezing at the same time.  There was an aid station at mile 57.3 kitted out with water and food stands—they had someone grilling burgers and another stirring a pot of soup. 

There was plenty of seating so runners could kick back and eat and drink their fill, but it wasn’t a crew meet-up, so the one thing I needed most—my heated gloves—remained out of reach. 

I didn’t eat too much, and though my fingers had lost dexterity, I managed to refill my bladder. 

After that, there wasn’t much to do but keep pushing while the sun slanted lower and lower in the sky. 

Thanks to my Raynaud’s, my hands and feet felt as heavy and inflexible as ice bricks, my fingers were frozen stiff, but my chest was steaming because so much warm blood had pooled in my torso. 

That made me thirsty, and I sucked my bladder dry by mile sixty-four. 

I still had two full water bottles, but I couldn’t drink from them because they were the type that I needed to squeeze to get a flow. 

I brainstormed how to take the lid off with my mouth and could have done it if I’d stopped to take the time, but that would have made me even colder, so I decided against it. 

I was extremely hungry but couldn’t access the food in my pack because my fingers were so wrecked. 

All I could think about was reaching the aid station to get those heated gloves on my hands. 

Alone beneath starry skies, I zeroed in on staying on course and on task. 

That meant minding the trail and GPS tracker while keeping a steady pace, but time ticks slowly when you’re freezing and thirsty and you know you could solve your problems if only your hands worked. 

I wasn’t surprised to feel my energy drain away. 

My hands hadn’t been this cold since SEAL training, and I leaned into those memories to push me uphill. 

Once again, I called upon past triumphs to push me forward. 

I wouldn’t let myself complain about the fact that my body had begun to betray me yet again. 

I blocked that out and ran on. 

Somehow, I made it and slow jogged into the 72.3-mile aid station dehydrated and cold all the way through. 

It was hella dark. 

There were dozens of support crews spread out on flat patches of dirt on both sides of a gravel road in the middle of nowhere. 

My bones rattled but only for as long as it took to register what was happening and find my team. 

Then, I reined it in. 

I didn’t want to show my crew so much as a twitch. 

Crewing races is thankless enough. 

I didn’t need them concerned about anything beyond getting me ready for the next leg.  Kish was the only one who knew about my Raynaud’s, and she quickly passed my heated gloves to Jason, one of our crew, who passed them to me. 

He figured I could put them on myself but watched me peel my thin gloves off my fingers with my teeth and saw that they had become ghost-white. 

When a Black man’s fingers are white as fresh snow, you know something is truly jacked up! He did his best to stuff my frozen hands into the gloves. 

It was like dressing a baby. 

He had to force each finger into place, one by one.  Even after a ten-minute hot shower, my hands still showing the effects of Raynaud’s My hands weren’t the only issue. 

Something was off with my lungs. 

While I have had respiratory problems in the past when it got cold, this felt different. 

I filed that concern away and focused on hydration, getting some food in me, and warming up. 

The heated gloves—which by now were covered by an even thicker pair of larger gloves—thawed my hands out, and I figured as my blood flow shifted back toward normal, my lungs would find some relief. 

All of that seemed to hold true because within fifteen minutes, I was energized and ready to get back out on the course. 

With a pacer by my side, I found a rhythm and started devouring miles as we rolled through Moab’s signature red-rock desert countryside under a blizzard of stars. 

Before long, I was in and out of the next aid station and running with my next pacer along a trail that became a rocky razor’s edge. 

I felt comfortable, but Joe, my pacer for this leg, was freaked out when that trail skirted a deep crater. 

I peered over the  edge. 

A deep abyss swallowed the glow of my headlamp. 

The only thing I could see clearly was that now was not the time to lose our footing. 

We checked into the next aid station at mile 102.3, approximately twenty-one hours into the race and in second place. 

That didn’t mean a whole lot. 

I was running well, so far, but we weren’t even halfway done. 

I flashed back to the start, when so many runners were giddy and excited. 

I wondered how they felt now. 

Exhausted? Cold? Scared? Were they still as motivated as they were one hundred miles ago? That’s why I never get emotional or over-excited at the beginning of something hard. 

The same is true when it comes to monitoring my progress. 

I never celebrate anything in the middle of a race. 

Better to stay calm, focused on my own effort, and aware that what I’ve gotten myself into is not a game and that there are hungry forces well beyond my control waiting to pounce from behind. 

A 240-mile run will never be a joy ride. 

If you’re feeling happy with yourself, odds are the tide is about to turn. 

That is why it’s so important to stay humble and keep that SA up at all times, a lesson I would relearn the hard way as we left the aid station by the light of our headlamps and ran onto a wide gravel road. 

The sun rose while we ran, and with my new pacer in charge of lead navigation duties and the leader’s fresh footprints to follow, I clocked into autopilot. 

I even put my phone away, the one with the GPS app I’d downloaded for the race. 

What did I need that for with my co-pilot on nav duty? There are three crucial requirements to maintaining a high level of SA. 

The first is astute perception. 

You need to see the environment clearly. 

That means knowing where you are on the map and having a good idea where the pitfalls might lie. 

Sometimes, the pitfall might be a member of your team who isn’t as squared away as you’d expected. 

It also requires a 360-degree comprehension of the current situation. 

You must understand the entire picture and take the time to investigate blind spots—areas you might not otherwise see because of exhaustion or low light. 

You also better have a plan to compensate for any limitations you identify. 

Finally, there is projection. 

Based on your perception and comprehension, what will your future status be? You can’t make decisions based solely on the present. 

You  need to think like a chess master and strategize several moves down the line. 

Unfortunately for me, I screwed that all up. 

When we hit an intersection near the bottom of a long descent, my pacer read the footprints and kept on running, and I followed. 

A few clicks down the road, I noticed that those footprints had turned around but didn’t give it a second thought because I trusted my pacer and never checked the GPS to confirm we were still on course. 

We just kept right on going. 

Kish was tracking our progress on her phone using the race leaderboard, which updated our location every five minutes. 

She could see that I was floating farther and farther out of bounds, and it stressed her out. 

Race HQ noticed too, and, like Kish, they sent messages and tried to call us for two and a half hours, but my pacer’s phone was out of range and mine was packed away. 

We didn’t know that the race leader had made the same wrong turn we did, but his phone somehow had reception, and he answered when headquarters called to alert him. 

That’s why those footprints doubled back after a couple of miles while we kept going for more than ten.  Kish frantically calling because we were off course  The tail of the loop is the Goggins bonus miles section and each square represents a five minute update.  Part of me sensed we were lost, but I didn’t realize that my pacer hadn’t downloaded the GPS app properly because I never spot-checked him. 

Spot checks are a regular part of Ranger School. 

Each candidate is required to carry several specific items in their bag throughout training, and Ranger Instructors are known to stop and ask random candidates to pull out any one of those specific items at any time. 

That’s a spot check. 

I should have spot-checked my pacer’s phone and made 100 percent sure the app was operational before we left the aid station. 

Not because I didn’t trust him, but because it was four in the morning and neither of us had slept. 

When I saw the footprints disappear, I missed another opportunity to double- check that we were still on course. 

We hadn’t seen a marker in miles, and both of us were out of food and water by the time we reached the next unmarked intersection. 

That’s when his phone blew up with dozens of text messages and missed calls from Kish. 

He stopped cold, his phone in his hand, with a blank look on his face. 

He didn’t even have to say it. 

Without a word, I turned and started running back in the other direction. 

Was I angry? Not really. 

Headquarters had been clear that the course was unmarked in many places, which is why I’d paid close attention to my GPS for the first 72.3 miles. 

But as soon as I picked up my pacers, I left everything up to them, and whenever I go into a non-thinking mode, I always fail. 

It happened at Delta Selection, and it happened again in Moab. 

SA is one of my greatest strengths. 

I take pride in reading terrain, being in tune with myself, and dialing in situations, and whenever my SA drops, whatever I’ve engaged in falls apart like instant karma. 

I had my reasons for handing off nav duty. 

I was trying to run my race straight through without any sleep. 

I knew that would take over two and a half days, and I thought it would be more manageable if all I had to do was run and focus on my form, nutrition, and hydration so I could break through any performance barriers and deal with any discomfort that popped up. 

Remember, I’d already been running for twenty-four hours by the time we made that wrong turn. 

I was exhausted, and it felt good not to have to think so much. 

But there is never a time in your life where you should give in to that autopilot mentality. 

Before the race, I explained to my pacers that their only job was to not get me lost, which I considered a worst-case scenario. 

Now that we were here, what good would blowing up at my pacer do? That would have made a bad problem even worse. 

We needed to focus on getting back on course. 

Plus, I still needed his help to finish the race. 

I couldn’t shatter his confidence and morale or turn the other crew  members against him. 

Especially since I was the one at fault. 

You never want to rely on someone else to lead you in your race. 

I should have used my pacer as a backstop navigator and kept my eyes on my own GPS the entire time. 

You cannot miss a turn! And any time you think you may have missed something, you must stop and nuke it right then. 

I should have had my phone out and checked the GPS app every five to ten minutes if not every mile, but I got lazy because my brain craved a break. 

I knew 240 miles were no joke and demanded dedication and perseverance, yet I let someone else navigate for me and never even spot-checked them. 

I could choose to be upset at them if I wanted to, but the only person accountable for this mess was me. 

Too many leaders deflect blame and point fingers instead of calling themselves out, but when they do that, nothing gets fixed in the short or long term. 

I immediately recognized that I allowed the worst-case scenario to happen, and that enabled me to move forward and deal with the ramifications that much faster. 

Once a mistake has been made in the heat of battle, the only thing that matters is dealing with the aftermath with a clear head. 

Figuring out where, when, and how things went wrong is important, but all evaluations must wait until the race is over. 

And now, I was in two races at once: Moab 240, and the race to get to the thyroid medication that awaited me at the next aid station. 

When I don’t take my thyroid meds, my body goes haywire. 

When it’s really hot, I can feel like I’m freezing. 

It can also make me slow and sluggish, as if I’m only half-awake, because a malfunctioning thyroid messes with your metabolism. 

I knew I had drop-dead times for meds, so why hadn’t I been carrying them with me? At the last aid station, Kish had them in a baggie ready to go, but I was running really well, and even though I knew I’d be cutting it close, I was confident I would make it to my meds in time given my steady pace. 

These are the exact mistakes you make when you assume smooth sailing, and the crucible of ultra is built to expose any and all wrong turns and bad choices. 

This had now become a very bad situation. 

After running a total of approximately fifteen miles off course, a race official pulled up in a vehicle a couple miles from our wrong turn. 

They drove us back to that fateful intersection, which was now clearly marked with signage to spare the runners behind me, but we were still fifteen miles from the next aid station and out of food and water, and I was in dire need of my meds. 

Headquarters gave Kish permission to meet us on course, but by then, my condition had deteriorated. 

My core temperature was plummeting, my lungs were heavy, and I knew that if I  continued to run, I would become a medical risk. 

There were still 135 miles to go in the race, and though I gulped my meds as soon as Kish arrived, my thyroid needed time to reset so my body temperature could normalize. 

I decided to rest with no idea how long that process might take. 

I’d already run 120 miles. 

Predictably, within an hour, my body reacted as if the race was over. 

I started to swell and tighten up as my muscles shifted into recovery mode. 

This would be a problem. 

I’d been dealing with my thyroid issue for years. 

A lot of people in the military, especially those of us in Special Operations, get diagnosed with hypothyroidism because our adrenals are constantly attacked during training and combat—there were forty thousand cases documented between 2008 and 2017. 

But I’d been living on a fight-or-flight cocktail of hormones ever since I was a young kid. 

Special Ops just finished the job of burning out my adrenal glands. 

Once the adrenals shut down, the body attempts to get what it needs by tapping the thyroid. 

The thyroid is the master computer of the endocrine system, and when it is over-taxed, our metabolism—the process of converting what we drink and eat into energy— becomes impaired, which can cause a cascade of consequences. 

Thanks in part to my stretching regimen, my adrenals had recovered enough in recent years to stop attacking the thyroid, which allowed it to begin healing. 

In fact, it turned out that my AFib episode over Christmas was sparked by a heavier-than- necessary dose of thyroid medication. 

Since then, my doctors and I had been experimenting with lower dosages. 

I’ve been a sickly boy all my life. 

If my body were only healthy and whole, there would be no telling what I might be able to accomplish. 

In the end, I was down for twelve hours, and while that amount of rest might sound like it could help me later in the race, it is actually quite the opposite. 

By the time I was back on the trail, my legs felt like they were made out of stone. 

I was that stiff and swollen. 

And I had fallen from second to something like eightieth place, which was more or less dead last. 

I had every excuse to quit—my luck had soured, my health was compromised, and I’d lost my SA at a crucial time. 

My race was completely hijacked, and I had over half the distance still to go! Some might look  at that version of events and think all was lost, but I knew from experience that the best life lessons don’t appear when things go well. 

It’s when all your goals and pretty plans burn to ash that you can see your flaws and learn more about yourself. 

You must take advantage of any opportunity to strengthen your resolve because when life hits you in the mouth, you will need that resolve. 

Of course, knowing that doesn’t make it easy to reengage when everything goes sideways. 

Actually getting out there and running the last 135 miles demanded a level of focus and commitment that is hard to find when you’ve been down and out for half a day. 

Fortunately, I’d been in similar situations so many times before. 

I knew what to do. 

For starters, I had to stay locked in mentally. 

A lot of people fall down when they get smacked, and when they hit the ground, they lose all momentum. 

Not just physically but mentally because they are humiliated, and when you are humiliated, it is impossible to make any sort of progress. 

We must learn how to absorb life’s haymakers without getting knocked down. 

Because picking yourself up off the canvas is the hardest, longest step of all as you fight to regain your momentum. 

Yes, I had to shut it down for half a day. 

Yes, all the goals I had for Moab 240 had been obliterated. 

Yes, my body was a mess, but mentally, I was still on my feet and in the race because I’m not living life for the same reasons as almost everyone else. 

The rewards I seek are internal, and if you have that mindset, you will find opportunities for growth everywhere. 

During tough times, that growth can be exponential. 

I wasn’t going to win the race or finish in a respectable time, but I had been gifted another rare opportunity to test myself in adverse conditions and become more. 

If anything, my desire to finish had only grown thanks to the mess I’d made. 

At the same time, I needed to ease some of the pressure I’d placed on myself. 

Pressure comes with high expectations, which is great because it can bring out your best, but there are times when it can be more helpful to offload pressure. 

When you are exhausted, it is vital to remain in control of your thoughts and emotions so you can make decisions with your right mind. 

Choosing to relieve pressure allows you to do that. 

When the pressure is high, you develop blinders that limit perspective. 

That’s great for certain situations that demand a hyper focus, but when you’re engaged in  something that demands your maximum endurance, it’s better to broaden your perspective and your awareness to absorb more of the experience, which enables maximum growth both during the event and in the days and weeks to follow. 

Besides, if you allow that unrelenting pressure to build, you’re liable to snap and make a bad situation a whole lot worse. 

Remember, the goal is always to complete the mission—whatever it may be—with no regrets and a clear head, so you can use it to progress in life. 

Cultivating a willingness to succeed despite any and all circumstances is the most important variable of the reengagement equation. 

Your willingness to succeed builds self-esteem. 

It broadens your concept of your own capability, yet it is the first thing we lose touch with when things go bad. 

After that, giving up often feels like the sanest option, and maybe it is, but know that quitting chips away at your self-worth and always requires some level of mental rehab. 

Even if what forces you to quit is an injury or something else beyond your control, you will still have to bounce back from the experience mentally. 

A successful mission seldom requires any emotional maintenance. 

In order to execute on your willingness to succeed, you will need to be able to perform without purpose. 

You’ve heard of purpose, that magical missing ingredient crucial to landing a fulfilling career and building a happy life. 

What if I told you the importance of finding your purpose was overblown? What if there never was any such thing as your good friend purpose? What if it doesn’t matter what you do with your time here? What if it’s all arbitrary and life doesn’t care if you want to be happy? What then? All I know is this: I am David Goggins. 

I exist; therefore, I complete what I start. 

I take pride in my effort and in my performance in all phases of life. 

Just because I am here! If I’m lost, I will find myself. 

As long as I’m on planet Earth, I will not half-ass it. 

Anywhere I lack, I will improve because I exist and I am willing. 

This is the mentality we should all strive for when we’re stuck. 

Because when you’re in the hurt locker, you must be your own motivator, your own drill instructor. 

In the dark moments, you must remind yourself why you chose to be there in the first place. 

That takes an edgy tone. 

When you’re all jacked up and looking for more, the only tone you should allow inside your head is the tone of a warrior. 

The tone of someone prepared to plunge deep inside their own soul to find the energy they need to keep up the fight and prevail!  In Moab, my willingness to succeed was fueled by my future. 

I knew the race I had planned to run was over, but as of that moment, next year’s race had already begun. 

My new mission was to sketch out the ultimate blueprint for this course. 

I’d released the pressure valve, and my entire team was refreshed and ready to scout details with me. 

Like future bank robbers, masters of disguise returning to the branch day after day to absorb the layout, document the rhythms of the staff, and come up with an unbeatable plan of attack, we would catalog firsthand knowledge of the next 135 miles so in 2020, I would be prepared to blow it up. 

Once I started again, I walked for the first ten minutes. 

My gait was way off. 

So were my lungs, but when I saw my first headlamp, I felt a little spark. 

After that, I began to add the pressure back, bit by bit. 

My pace increased, and my competitive edge resurfaced. 

I managed to pass two dozen people before hitting the aid station at mile 140. 

Kish was next up as pacer, and she had a ball. 

We’d been running together for years, but this was the first time she was able to check me on a long stretch, and she made it look way too easy. 

To be fair, the terrain was flat and smooth, but she hadn’t slept either. 

She’d been the crew chief the whole time yet ran like she’d had a full night’s sleep. 

I’d run 157 total miles by then (counting the off-course mileage) and was deep in the hurt locker, while she was checking her phone, collecting footage, and keeping tabs on the crew. 

Whenever I stopped to walk, she always ran a bit farther ahead to wait for me. 

She wasn’t trying to get under my skin, but I took it as a challenge and was able to pick up my pace enough to pass several dozen runners. 

Some were walking, others were asleep on the trail or at the aid stations, content to take their time, knowing they had three more days to complete the course. 

The one person I couldn’t keep pace with was Kish, and that’s all I cared about! By the time we got to the Rd 46 aid station at mile 167, I was back in the top ten. 

But it wasn’t time for high-fiving because my lung issues were still there. 

It didn’t matter if I was running or walking, standing up or sitting down, I could not get a full breath. 

I was freezing too, which was a sign that my thyroid may not have had enough time to completely reset. 

I felt horrible, but I had weathered a thyroid problem and run through the night for the second night in a row. 

Pain and discomfort were to be expected.  This aid station had more food stands, and I ate my fill. 

As I left—a few minutes ahead of my pacer, who was still organizing gear and wasn’t ready to go—I wondered if I’d eaten too much because my chest felt very tight. 

Did I have a digestive issue? I couldn’t say for sure, so I continued to troubleshoot. 

I had a fully loaded pack on my back that was heavy enough to make the chest strap extremely tight. 

Maybe that was what prevented my lungs from fully expanding? I loosened the strap and felt even worse. 

While I had gone farther than this once before, that was back in 2007 and on a flat one-mile track. 

I had never gone this far on this type of terrain and in these conditions, but I had pushed myself to the limit plenty of times and never felt anything like this. 

Could it be a sickle cell crisis? If it was, I’d never had one this serious. 

I couldn’t pinpoint the problem, but by the time my pacer caught me, I felt something was extremely wrong. 

I told him everything, and as I listened to myself spill my sad story, I couldn’t help thinking about all the whiners I’d come across over the years who gave every excuse in the world as to why they couldn’t finish whatever it was they’d started. 

The vast majority of them were simply looking for a way out that allowed them to keep their heads up—like me when I quit Pararescue. 

I took mental note of all of those people, remembered the scenarios they were in, and kept them on lock in my brain. 

And here I was sounding just like them. 

Whether it is a seven-mile run or a 240-mile run, we all know what it’s like to bargain with ourselves to avoid having to do the very thing we said we would. 

We say we’re overworked, overwhelmed, or just over it entirely. 

I never give in to that because I know there are a lot of people out there who do not have that choice to make. 

They cannot run at all and wish more than anything that they could. 

At the same time, I knew I wasn’t merely uncomfortable. 

I was seriously screwed up! But running Moab 240 had been my choice. 

Staying in the race had been my choice, and it was a blessing that I had those choices to make. 

So, like always, I soldiered on. 

And as the trail wound through farmland and pitched toward the sky and into those mountains that had looked painted against the distant horizon all day, I reminded myself why I wanted to be there. 

It was for that one second of glory— the biggest high of all time that strikes and fades like a bolt of lightning, but only if you manage to figure out a way to swim through all the pain, overcome every last obstacle, and cross the finish line.  Over the next thirteen miles, we gained 3,500 feet of elevation, and my pace slowed dramatically. 

Part of that was the incline, but there were times when the footing was bad too. 

In sections, the trail was covered with slate, shattered cobbles, and boulders. 

It was really unstable, so I took my time. 

And after ten miles, I actually started to feel a little better. 

I didn’t feel great, but my condition had improved, and my pacer, who had done due diligence on past performances to gauge how hard I should push on each section, said we were covering this leg at a fast clip. 

That gave me hope as the trail wound into the alpine forest at just under nine thousand feet and into the Pole Canyon aid station at dusk, where a volunteer griddled fluffy pancakes and handed them out to all comers. 

My crew was there waiting on me with a syrupy stack and a race update. 

I had moved all the way up to eighth place. 

Even if my problems were digestive, and I wasn’t entirely convinced of that, I still had to fuel up. 

I took the plate from Kish and continued to troubleshoot while I ate. 

I asked if she had accidentally mixed the wrong powder—something with caffeine —in my water bottles. 

I have a caffeine intolerance, but Kish knew that and assured me that did not happen. 

One thing I still hadn’t considered was altitude because while we were climbing at times, we were not very high for very long. 

My lungs had been fine during Leadville just six weeks earlier, and I ran the majority of those one hundred miles above ten thousand feet. 

The source of my problem remained elusive, and that bothered me because the race was nowhere near done. 

Anything could happen out there, and sure enough, not long after I made my way out of the aid station, my breathing problems returned. 

Within five minutes, I stopped and asked Dan, my pacer for this section, to call Kish and tell her and the crew to stay at Pole Canyon in case we needed to turn around. 

But I also wanted to give myself every chance to walk through the fire. 

Maybe it was the pancakes? Last time, I felt better after a couple of hours, and if I could stay upright and on the trail, then it followed that these symptoms might pass again. 

Incremental progress is still progress, I said to myself. 

One step is all that is required to take the next one. 

With that in mind, I told Dan to call Jennifer again and say we were going to press on and we would let her know if anything changed. 

We continued climbing into the  night toward the highest point in the entire race at 10,500 feet. 

The protocol was this: take a few steps, double over, and lean heavily on my poles until I could get the few deep breaths necessary to power me forward for another three to five steps, repeat. 

I couldn’t breathe at all while I was moving. 

It was all panting and gasping. 

Whenever I stopped to breathe, I could see Dan waiting for me with a concerned look on his face. 

“I’m sorry,” I gasped. 

“I’m sorry.” I must have said sorry close to three hundred times. 

I don’t know why I kept apologizing. 

Mostly he responded, “It’s not that far to the top.” Which was quite comical because I knew we weren’t even close! He was trying to spoon-feed me some hope, but hope would not get me to the top. 

Nice try, Dan! I thought to myself. 

In the fourth hour, about six miles into the 16.5-mile section—that’s right, we were moving at a snail’s pace of just over thirty minutes per mile—I finally and abruptly stopped. 

“This ain’t…good,” I said, gasping. 

I was proud of myself for trying, but I still wasn’t feeling any better. 

In fact, my lungs had gotten much worse, and Dan agreed that we should get off the course and find a medic. 

He dialed Kish and broke the news, and I watched his face fall at her response. 

“Hey, man,” he said after he hung up. 

I was still bent over at the waist, begging for oxygen. 

“I hate to tell you this, but we gotta walk out of here.” He explained that there were only two options. 

Option one was to descend six miles, back to Pole Canyon. 

Option two was to keep climbing for nine more miles toward a trailhead where my crew could meet us. 

None of this came as a surprise to me, as we were on a narrow singletrack. 

I had been looking for different trails that might offer a possible way out all night but hadn’t seen one. 

The only trail I saw was the one I was walking on, and I knew there was no way a vehicle, an ATV, or anything of the sort could reach me here in no man’s land. 

I also knew for certain there was no helicopter to fly me out of there. 

The only way out was under my own power. 

Going back to Pole Canyon was not an option because despite my wretched condition, I did not intend to quit the race. 

Somehow, I was still willing—so instead of losing mileage, I opted to continue climbing. 

This was no longer a race. 

This had become war, and I was wounded but maintained hope that eventually the medic  would dial me in, and I could carry on with the fight. 

The night closed in around us as we picked away at the distance. 

In some spots, the trail was just wide enough to place my feet down one in front of the other. 

Drop- offs materialized from the shadows without warning. 

Breathing continued to be a struggle, and I couldn’t stop thinking about John Skop, the young, six-foot-two, 225-pound stud who died of pulmonary edema during my third Hell Week. 

I would shuffle my feet forward, lean over my poles, close my eyes, and there he was, feverish and jackhammering, suffering from pneumonia and the late stages of pulmonary edema on the pool deck. 

His skin was almost translucent, his eyes vacant, his breath shallow, just like mine. 

He looked fragile as porcelain but had no intention of quitting. 

When he rejoined the caterpillar swim, he was weak because he could barely breathe, and within a few minutes, he was found on the bottom of the pool and could not be resuscitated. 

Skop had been trying to become a SEAL at all costs, and I will always respect him for that. 

I would have done the same thing. 

There are certain things in life that warrant an “even if I die” mindset. 

Sometimes, that’s a place you have to go, but what’s on the other side of that mountain has to be something you want more than anything in the world. 

However willing I may have been, finishing Moab 240 did not qualify. 

I’d accomplished enough that finishing the race wouldn’t change a thing when it came to how I felt about myself, and I certainly didn’t need to die for it. 

By then, I suspected I had high-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE), a dangerous condition in which the lungs fill with blood and plasma. 

It’s a version of what happened to Skop, and it can happen to anybody in the high country, even experienced mountaineers, at relatively low altitudes. 

I was at close to ten thousand feet, which is not all that high, but because I’d already run over two hundred miles, I was susceptible to anything and everything. 

With less than three miles to go before I would reach the top of the peak and the next aid station at mile 201.4, a medic and two members of my crew found us on the trail. 

Unfortunately, there was nothing the medic could do for me. 

My choices were to either continue walking all the way to the aid station or stop at a trailhead on the way, where our vehicle was waiting. 

I knew that after the next aid station,  there was a long descent, and despite how bad I felt, I did wonder if my body might be able to bounce back. 

Then I caught myself. 

I’m often mistaken for a masochist. 

Some people think I push past pain and take unreasonable risks for sport or spectacle, but that’s not true. 

I push a lot harder than most, but I don’t do it to injure myself or impress others, and I sure don’t want to die. 

I do it because the body and mind never fail to amaze me. 

I had no business hiking 16.5 miles in my condition. 

The last nine felt impossible because I thought I’d reached my physical limit, but when I looked for it, I found more. 

Whenever I’ve been challenged, whenever I’ve been forced to scrap for additional resources to stay afloat, there has always been more. 

That’s why I ride that line: because those dark moments are rare, raw, and beautiful. 

However, that night, I felt worse than ever, and I knew that any extra stress on my body might be my breaking point. 

When we reached the trailhead, I left the course to seek medical treatment, which meant, according to the rules, that I was automatically DNF’d. 

On the drive to the local hospital, we lost nearly six thousand feet in altitude, and I began hocking up knots of brown phlegm. 

In the emergency room, the doctor took a chest X-ray that confirmed my air sacs were full of fluid. 

I had HAPE alright. 

She checked my vitals, drew blood, gave me a small-volume nebulizer oxygen treatment to open up the lungs, and tested my phlegm to see what kind of infection was present. 

A few hours later, at around six in the morning, the hospital discharged me with an inhaler that would help keep my lungs opened up.  HAPE diagnosis  When Kish and I got back to the condo we’d rented, the rest of our crew was busy packing, cleaning, and getting ready to travel home. 

The mood was subdued. 

This race had been tough on everyone. 

My crew had fought through multiple setbacks and weathered a ton of highs and lows, and while I was proud of running 215 miles with a broken body and considered those last 16.5 miles of slow marching some of the grittiest I’d ever clocked, taking a DNF is a crappy feeling, and everybody knew it. 

At least I felt better. 

By afternoon, I’d stopped coughing up phlegm, and my body temperature and energy levels were back to normal, which told me that my thyroid was functioning again. 

When I had to take DNFs in the past, there was no quick bounce back. 

I was down for weeks. 

This situation was new, and it sent my mind reeling. 

There are a lot of people who stay down way too long. 

They may have been sick as hell but are on the mend, yet when asked how they are feeling, they act like they are no better. 

In fact, they play it up for pity points. 

I am not one of those people. 

The second I feel I can get after it, I am going to get after it. 

Bottom line: I was struggling with the fact that I was feeling well enough to compete and was in a condo instead of on the trail. 

A voice in my head woke me from my fitful slumber at three in the morning. 

It repeated the same savage mantra over and over. 

You’re not done yet, Goggins! I popped up, bleary-eyed and half asleep. 

There was nobody else in the room but Kish, and she was dead to the world. 

I lay back down and closed my eyes, but the voice returned. 

You are not done yet! I knew what I had to do but had no clue how Kish would take it. 

We’d packed it in. 

Two members of the crew had already left, and the other two were leaving on flights in a matter of hours, but I would finish the job alone if necessary. 

I turned and placed my hand on Kish’s shoulder. 

She blinked twice. 

“What time does the finish line close?” I asked. 

Her eyes grew wide. 

She looked disoriented, so I asked again, “What time does the finish line close?”  Kish knew that what I really wanted to know was if there was enough time left for me to run the last forty or so miles. 

The race had started four days ago, but runners had 110 hours to complete it. 

She sat up and grabbed her phone from the nightstand. 

“We have fifteen hours,” she said. 

There was something matter of fact about the way she said it that fed my fire. 

She may not have understood why I was still holding on to this race, but her mind was made up. 

She was in, and that’s all that mattered. 

We got up. 

I rousted the two members of my crew who were still with us and asked if they would be willing to postpone their flights for one more day. 

Within a few minutes, we were all in the kitchen arranging our gear and grabbing a quick bite. 

The little bit of rest had done me good, and while Moab was only at four thousand feet in elevation and things might change when we returned to altitude, I wouldn’t be in the high country for long. 

There was only a mile and a half of climbing, then a long descent back to town. 

But don’t mistake my willingness to finish the job as excitement to get back out there and run another forty miles. 

I had already run 215 miles over the last four days, and though I felt well enough to get after it, my body had started to recover, which meant I was stiff and very swollen. 

I knew this would hurt. 

Before we left, Kish placed a call to my doctor back home to make sure I wasn’t taking any unnecessary risks. 

After a moment of silence to consider who she was talking to and peruse my thick medical file in her mind, she okayed it. 

“If you start to feel any symptoms, please stop immediately, leave the course, and return to lower elevation,” she said. 

On the drive up the mountain, my ears popped, which was a reminder of how much altitude we were gaining. 

I had no clue what would happen at 10,500 feet, but while I didn’t really want to run again, I suspected I was capable, which meant I had to try to finish the job. 

Completing the blueprint is what excited me, so that’s what I focused on. 

Kish pulled into the trailhead parking lot near mile marker two hundred, where I had left the course. 

I was looking to waste no time at altitude. 

My pacer and I  grabbed our gear and headed up the mountain quickly. 

My team maintained contact for those first two miles to make sure I was okay. 

My legs were stiff as rocks, and I walked with an unsteady gait, but my breathing was fine. 

Still, I felt weak and unconfident. 

This course had gotten the better of me since mile seventy-two, and part of me thought I was either insane or stupid for trying to finish. 

Probably both.  Back at the scene of the crime, mile two hundred Kish trailed us on the gravel road heading to the mountaintop, and with “Going the Distance” blasting through the open windows, she pulled up alongside and smiled. 

That anthem was an old friend. 

We’d shared countless dark times, and it never failed to drown out all my internal chatter and wake up my inner savage. 

I let the music soak in and found my determination to mark a course that had been kicking my butt for four days. 

“I’m back!” I yelled, picking up my pace. 

“You thought you had me! You thought you had me down! Only for a second. 

I’m back!” From then on, it was all growth. 

The next forty miles were my strongest of the entire race. 

I hit a level of awareness that allowed me to run free and unpack and examine the previous two hundred-plus miles at the same time. 

With my feet still on the same ground where I’d come up short, eyes on the rocks and trees that played tricks on me, and my mind on where I screwed up, I was able to complete my ultimate blueprint. 

And the most important thing I learned as I descended toward the red rocks of Moab was that 240 miles is an entirely new realm, and my failure came down to a fundamental flaw in my approach. 

I’d perfected the 100-mile distance. 

I knew the gear I needed and how to manage the distance with my mind, but that proved irrelevant in Moab. 

Hundred-milers have aid stations sprinkled every six to ten miles. 

In Moab, the aid stations were often several hours apart. 

All but one of the dozens of 100-mile races I’d run were on well-marked courses, so there was no need to prioritize navigation. 

I’d rocked up like this was just another race, but it was a whole different arena, and that single error led to a cascade of small mistakes  that were magnified by the distance into a catastrophe. 

Next year, the Moab 240 would be part race, part military mission. 

I would imagine the worst-case scenario and work backwards from there so no matter what happened, I would be armed with a plan to remain competitive. 

I realized that the farther the distance, the more I had to have all the details dialed. 

There would be no room to take chances with gear or meds. 

I had to carry it all with me. 

I couldn’t count on bridging great distances between meet-ups with my crew in a timely fashion. 

I needed to spot-check my pacers, update my phone, and have back-up comms on hand. 

Normally, I enjoy being unreachable and off grid when I’m trail running, but next year, I would make an exception because that’s what the course demands. 

I worked over dozens of small adjustments in my mind as I flew downhill, my lungs in fine shape, my stride efficient and powerful. 

And I reminded myself that in each and every evolution of life, you never want to be the principal reason for a failed mission. 

Nobody wants to wake up after the race is over wishing they’d been better prepared. 

If something surprises you in anything you are trying to accomplish these days, with so much free knowledge at our fingertips, it is because you didn’t prepare well enough, and there is no excuse for that. 

Missions may fail for dozens of reasons, which is fine. 

Make sure it was something beyond your control—an act of God or Mother Nature—that prevented you from achieving your goal. 

Then, draw up your ultimate blueprint, and try again. 

As I ran from a bike trail onto the Moab city streets, I knew I’d make the cut off, but because I’d DNF’d, I didn’t have the right to cross the official finish line. 

For me, that would have to wait until next year. 

We found a worthy alternative: a random telephone pole, one of several on a busy highway. 

As traffic zoomed by, I jogged along the shoulder until my total mileage clicked over to 255—that included the official 240 plus those fifteen unofficial miles. 

I didn’t raise my arms or pump my fists, and nobody seemed to notice one man finish what he started, but I felt a deep sense of satisfaction. 

There was no fanfare, but there was glory, and it was all inside.    My Moab 240 2019 finish line. 

All internal glory. 

From the outside looking in, my Moab 240 was a disaster. 

I got lost, nearly froze my tail off, and had multiple medical meltdowns. 

I went off course twice. 

It was messy, but I consider it one of my top five performances ever because I never should have completed that distance in the time allowed. 

But I did. 

Yes, the scoreboard still read: Moab 1, Goggins 0, but I left Utah with a precious gift. 

Unlike during 2018, when I was uncertain about so much, I knew exactly where I would be in twelve months’ time: right back here. 

It would require a long year of hard training and a commitment to studying my blueprint like a textbook. 

So be it. 

This race had not seen the last, or the best, of David Goggins!     Evolution No. 

6 Small minds and weak people kill big dreams. 

You might have clear goals and be working on yourself every day, but if you have the wrong folks around you, there’s a good chance they could be sucking the life right out of you and making sure that you go nowhere. 

When I select my crew, I’m not looking for elite runners to pace me. 

I look for individuals with a foxhole mentality. 

Of the four men who joined Kish and me in Moab, only one had ever done an ultra before, and two others barely ran twenty miles a week, but I didn’t choose them for their running ability; they all understood me. 

They appreciated my mindset, knew how far I was willing to go, and were ready to do whatever it took to get me there. 

My success in this race was their only priority. 

When I told them I was heading back out to finish the job, nobody was surprised. 

They had been with me all day, knew I was feeling better, and, most importantly, know who I am. 

They expected me to try and finish. 

When I knocked on their doors at four in the morning, they were nearly packed for the trail already, with a look on their faces that said, “What took you so long?” In military speak, the foxhole is a fighting position. 

In life, it’s your inner circle. 

These are the people you surround yourself with. 

They know your history and are aware of your future goals and past limitations. 

But because it’s a fighting position, a foxhole can just as easily become your grave. 

Therefore, it is crucial that you be careful about who you invite in. 

Whether you are at war, competing in a game, or striving in life, you never want someone in your foxhole who lacks faith or will try to steer you away from your full potential by giving you permission to pack it in or wave the white flag when the situation looks bleak. 

You want the husband or wife who, when you snooze that alarm on a freezing mid- winter morning before dawn, shakes you awake so you don’t miss your training run. 

When you’re dieting and whine about being bored of eating the same bland foods every day, they remind you of all the progress you have made, of all the hard work you have put in, and happily eat the same bland foods alongside you. 

When you say you’re tired from all the late-night studying, they stay up late with you to help you study.  You want the type of race crew who, when you’re suffering on the trail, are inspired by bearing witness to your struggle. 

They know it is proof of your effort. 

In turn, their refusal to give up on you can only inspire you to tap the reserves you’d forgotten were there and give more. 

They know the only time to shut down and walk away is after all options have been exhausted. 

Even if that means yet another sleepless night or a last-minute change of schedule. 

When those are the people in your foxhole, how can you not stay in the fight? Most people don’t have a selection process for their foxhole. 

They invite all the old cronies and close relatives in by default. 

As if growing up with someone is the top qualification for foxhole membership. 

Old friends are great and shared history is to be respected, but not every person who has been in your life a long time is looking out for your best interests. 

Some of them are threatened by your growth because of how it impacts them. 

Some are looking for a friend to keep them company in their unfulfilling lives. 

In order to populate your foxhole with the right people, you must first know who you are as an individual. 

That means shaking off old belief systems—creaky concepts of the world and your place in it—that no longer serve you and the habits and lifestyle that you’ve outgrown. 

Any ideas or interests that were impressed upon you by others, whether they be your family, peers, or culture, must be examined consciously so you can see through all of them and discover your own unique individuality. 

For most people, this is a slow, organic process that can take years, if it happens at all, but if you bring intentionality to it, individuation can be accelerated. 

Once you find out who you are, the world will start delivering you care packages filled with opportunities that will fuel your quest. 

In addition to power eating and spraying cockroaches, I did a lot of searching after I left the Air Force at twenty-four years old. 

I was looking for my place in the world and tried on different personas and subcultures. 

I explored becoming a wrestler. 

I got into powerlifting and thought about competing in that sport, but those weren’t honest choices. 

I didn’t burn with a desire to wrestle or lift heavy on stage. 

All I knew was that I didn’t want to be David Goggins anymore. 

I wanted to be the hardest person ever to live. 

The problem was I didn’t know what that looked like. 

It was terrifying to admit that to anyone, including myself, because at the time, I was out of shape, working a low-wage job, and living well beyond my means. 

How do you go from that to being hard as hell? I had no clue and wondered if I was  delusional. 

Who gave me the right to have such an audacious dream? Even I thought I sounded ridiculous. 

But as absurd as it may have seemed, I didn’t let go of that dream. 

I let it linger in the back of my brain. 

Then one day, a care package arrived in the form of a Navy SEAL documentary. 

And there it was. 

I finally found a place to start that might just lead me there. 

My dream no longer felt delusional. 

It felt possible. 

My evolution had begun, but as my Navy SEAL future crystallized over the next several months, I learned that when you change, not everyone in your life will be on board. 

You will get some serious resistance, and it will be a pain. 

Everywhere I turned, I found family members, friends, and coworkers resistant to my evolution because they loved the Ecolab-spraying, chocolate-shake-slurping fat boy. 

At three hundred pounds, I made them feel much better about themselves, which is another way of saying, they were holding me back. 

Years later, I learned how common that kind of thing is. 

Most of the men I recruited into the SEALs confided that their wives, girlfriends, or parents were dead set against something they wanted more than anything in the world. 

That can be extremely stressful. 

When you are striving to be you—especially when it involves pushing your limits of pain and suffering or sacrificing life and limb—you do not need to deal with trying to make everybody happy at the same time. 

When you are conflicted like that, your internal dialogue becomes counterproductive, and when those moments of truth arrive and the quitting mind gets loud, that inner conflict might be the very thing that convinces you to give up. 

When I first made the decision to try to become a Navy SEAL, the only person in my foxhole was my mom. 

She knew what it entailed and was immediately on board. 

I didn’t see any fear in her eyes. 

While she was worried about me, she believed in what I was doing even more, and that allowed me to train and fight with a clear head and maximum focus. 

Years later, when I ran Badwater, she was in my crew. 

I walked one hundred of those 135 miles, and when horseflies were all over me and I was suffering in the heat, she got out of the support vehicle, sobbing. 

Not because I was in pain, but because she was proud of me. 

Because I was pushing through it all like a warrior. 

Not all friends and loved ones react that way when you change and become committed to perpetual growth. 

Some are genuinely offended, and you don’t need or want their voices in your head. 

Which is a nice way of saying you may be required to leave some people behind along the way. 

Who you hang around and speak to on the daily matters. 

That’s why it is not a successful formula for people in  drug and alcohol recovery to continue to hang out with the people they used to party with if they want to stay sober. 

When you evolve, your inner circle must evolve with you. 

Otherwise, you may subconsciously halt your own growth to avoid outpacing and losing contact with the people who mean a lot to you but may not be able to hang with you. 

When there is no one around you who believes in or understands your quest, you must turn your foxhole into a one-man fighting position. 

That’s okay. 

It is always better to fight alone until you can find people strong enough to fight the good fight with you. 

There is no time to waste trying to pull deadweight up a hill. 

I’ve been there many times, and you must hold out until reinforcements arrive, even if it takes years. 

Loneliness can be difficult and depleting, but I’d much rather you stay lonely than crawl out of your foxhole and trek back through known territory into the arms of the very people who loved the old you and were never comfortable with your transformation. 

Does this mean you have to end all relationships or burn all bridges? No, not necessarily. 

But doubters must be kept at arm’s length, and anyone in your inner circle must accept you for who you are and who you want to become. 

This may require an adjustment period, and that is understandable. 

But within a reasonable amount of time, the men and women in your foxhole must, in their words and actions, give you permission to be you. 

In 2018, right before I received my VFW award, I realized how much I couldn’t stand being retired. 

I spent hours calling old friends and new contacts in the military, looking for a way back in. 

I considered reenlisting in Pararescue, but remembering how much I loved Ranger School and Delta Selection, I thought the Army might be a better fit, so I dropped word that I was interested in enlisting as a forty-four-year-old grunt. 

It didn’t take long for a recruiter to reach out. 

He was convinced he could make it happen, but it meant moving to some backwoods Army base for training. 

Kish was not thrilled. 

She’d worked hard in the corporate world for twenty years, and she did not expect to be living on or around an Army base at that point in her life. 

She certainly didn’t expect me to turn down dozens of lucrative speaking gigs to prepare for a third stint in the military. 

By then, I was already earning more money for an hour or two of public speaking than I’d earn in a year as a grunt.  I found myself walking on eggshells, wondering if the woman I loved would want to stay with me. 

At the same time, I knew living someone else’s idea of my life is a recipe for misery. 

In the end, for a number of reasons, I didn’t reenlist. 

I got into wildland firefighting instead. 

My mission hadn’t changed. 

I was, and still am, trying to become the hardest person to ever live. 

That’s not an ego trip. 

It’s a way of life. 

It may be far-fetched and even unachievable, but I remain in service of that vision. 

Fast forward a few years, and Kish is most definitely foxhole qualified. 

Now, she is the one who blocks off the fire season entirely and turns down every speaking inquiry that comes in for those months without even asking me because she understands exactly who I am and what I am about. 

She knows what my priorities are and fully supports them without question. 

She admires that I am fulfilled by doing things that most people shy away from and that the lure of money and fame do absolutely nothing for me but leave me feeling empty. 

She wants me to find my very best. 

I’m wired the same way. 

When Kish confided in me that she wanted to run a sub- 3:25 marathon, I helped her train and strategize, and she accomplished her goal with a time of 3:21 in Philadelphia. 

When she mentioned possibly applying to law school, she received a package of LSAT books at the door the very next day. 

Don’t ever tell me you want to run a marathon because I will sign you up for a race, monitor your daily training, and run with you. 

If you tell me you want to be a doctor, I’ll be the one who enrolls you in med school while you’re sleeping, and you’ll wake up to a class first thing in the morning. 

Most people can’t handle that level of intensity. 

But that’s the kind of backing I want. 

The type that comes with an expectation of effort and demands hours, weeks, and even years of hard work. 

Because that is exactly what it takes to fulfill lofty ambitions and, more important than that, find out what you are truly capable of. 

Who’s in your foxhole? Tag them and tell them why! #FoxholeMentality #NeverFinished Chapter Seven    7. 

The Reckoning The minute I got home from Moab, I went for a run. 

Training for next year’s race was underway that quickly, and I was fired up! Running had long ago become like breathing to me. 

It wasn’t a hobby; it was almost a subconscious biological reflex. 

I had to do it. 

I didn’t necessarily enjoy it, but I could tell on that initial eight-mile shakeout that there was going to be something very different about this training block. 

I could already feel the fire. 

Day after day, I could not wait to get after it, and I trained with reckless abandon. 

My mind was tracking like never before. 

This wasn’t merely about checking some box, this was straight-up redemption. 

The fitness I gained would also benefit the only other significant event on my 2020 radar, the wildland firefighting season in Montana. 

But in April 2020, a few short weeks before I was due to report to work in Missoula, my left knee swelled up like a water balloon. 

My knees had troubled me periodically since Navy SEAL training, and I wasn’t overly concerned at first. 

I’d been going hard and figured it was due to overuse rather than injury. 

I ignored the tenderness and ran through the pain for days. 

My body has been compensating for illness and injury for so long that I figured it was only a matter of time before my quadriceps stabilized my knee joint and the pain faded into the background. 

But it got worse. 

Reluctantly, I traded in the majority of my road miles for a few daily hours on the elliptical trainer. 

However, firefighting demands a special variety of real-world fitness. 

To prepare for the infamous 110-pound rucks that awaited me in Montana, I hiked the local trails with a one-hundred-pound pack strapped to my back a couple times a week. 

It was too late to pull out of firefighting. 

I’d given leadership my word and was determined to back it up, but by the end of the month, my left knee was twice its normal size and throbbed day and night. 

Three days before heading north, I opted to get an MRI to understand exactly what I was dealing with. 

The tech who conducted my scan had recognized me, and on my way out the door, I asked her if she could tell me anything. 

Techs aren’t supposed to discuss what  they see with patients or attempt to analyze images, but she shook her head, and her expression suggested I was in for a rough road ahead. 

“Look,” she said, “you got a lot going on in that knee.” “What do you mean by that?” “I mean you won’t be doing any running or those triathlons of yours anytime soon.” I’d wanted to tell her that I’d run ten miles before coming to the radiology office but held my tongue because I suspected she was right. 

I downloaded the results in an Idaho motel room where we stopped to break up the long drive. 

The official report confirmed multiple tears in the medial and lateral meniscus, a sprained posterior cruciate ligament, general cartilage breakdown and arthritis, defects in the lower tip of my femur, a massive Baker’s cyst behind the knee, and, to top it all off, a partially torn ACL. 

In layman’s terms, my knee was eight-ways jacked.  MRI report on my left knee, May 2020 The news was deflating. 

The feeling of an honest day’s work is the best feeling I will ever have in my life, and for nearly a year, I’d been looking forward to getting back into the mountains to grind with a backcountry fire crew. 

We’d blocked off five months and declined all speaking engagements for that period of time, and now, my season looked doomed. 

As I lay awake that night, Kish reminded me that we still had two weeks before day one of training and that we knew an innovative, thirty-five-year-old sports physio based in Missoula, where we’d rented a studio apartment for the summer. 

Casey specialized in working with world-class athletes and was often on the road with a well-known professional tennis player—in fact, we’d met him at a tournament in Rome in 2019—but because the coronavirus pandemic had suspended the tour, he was back home seeing patients and able to work me into his  daily schedule. 

Two weeks obviously wasn’t enough time to fix my knee, but I didn’t need to be 100 percent. 

If he could help me get even 10 percent healthier, it might be enough. 

Two days later, I limped into Casey’s office where 120 milliliters of bloody synovial fluid was pulled out of the knee. 

Enough to fill multiple vials. 

It was like watching a blow-up toy get reduced to a wrinkled shell after all the air leaked out, and it was obvious that the joint had very little structural integrity left. 

My range of motion was freakish. 

My lower left leg moved like a pendulum, nearly forty-five degrees to either side, while the patella floated like an air-hockey puck. 

For the next two weeks, I spent four to five hours a day with Casey for a regimen of massage therapy, range of motion work, and a treatment called “dry needling,” which is similar to acupuncture. 

He stuck me with over two hundred of those things. 

I was a man-sized pin cushion. 

We had the knee drained twice more for good measure, and while I submitted to whatever crazy interventions he devised, all I could do was hope. 

I hoped something might work. 

I hoped Casey might crack the skeletomuscular code to heal my wobbly knee. 

That his needles held the power to not just reduce inflammation but reconnect frayed and torn ligaments and regrow cartilage. 

More than anything, I hoped that we wouldn’t be asked to dig sidehill on a steep slope. 

I could deal with pain and had enough stability to move straight ahead on flat ground, but lateral movement of any kind, especially on uneven terrain, would be impossible. 

Unfortunately, Montana is not known for an abundance of flat ground, and as we know, hope is not an anchor point. 

In other words, I hope you know that I knew I was screwed. 

But I showed up early the first morning of training, regardless.    First of many drainings in May 2020 My 2020 fire season ended on an all-night dig. 

We rucked into the wooded mountains north of Missoula, where I withstood the pain for five hours while I scrambled to find stable footing. 

I used boulders and logs to support my buckling left leg as I swung at the hard ground with my Pulaski. 

In the evening, as we approached the top of a slope, I stepped on a slick log cloaked by leaf litter. 

My left leg went two directions at once, my knee popped, and like one of those Imperial Walkers in the Star Wars movies, I collapsed in a contorted heap. 

In one agonizing misstep, my fate was sealed. 

My eyes watered from the pain when the emergency room doc reset my dislocated patella later that night. 

The orthopedist who conducted MRIs on both my knees the next day said that in his professional opinion, I had the knees of a ninety-year-old man, which only confirmed exactly how I felt. 

He hinted that knee-replacement surgery was in my near future and instructed me to take several months off. 

I was in a bad way, and I had to accept that, but just like the night before, I didn’t let the news or the pain get in my head for long. 

Unfortunate situations never last, but I knew that a bad attitude always lingers and can turn any setback into a tailspin. 

The only thing more infectious than a good attitude is a bad one. 

The more you dwell on the negative, the weaker you feel, and that weakness infects those around you. 

However, the reverse is also true. 

I knew that if I could control my attitude and  redirect my attention, I’d gain control of the entire situation. 

I was disappointed, but I wasn’t surprised that my knee gave out. 

Now, it was on me to learn what I could from the setback, adapt, and move forward. 

It’s an unwritten natural law of the universe that you will be tested. 

You will get smacked in the face. 

A hurricane will land on your head. 

It’s inevitable for all of us. 

Yet, we are not formally taught how to handle unexpected adversity. 

We have sex education, fire drills, active-shooter drills, and curriculum on the dangers of alcohol and drugs, but there is no rug-just-got-pulled-out-from-under-you class. 

Nobody teaches how to think, act, and move when disappointment, bad news, malfunction, and disaster inevitably strike. 

All the advice floods in only after we are already lying dazed on the canvas. 

Which means it’s up to you to cultivate your own strategy and have the discipline to practice it. 

Mine is simple. 

No matter what life serves me, I say, “Roger that.” Most people think “Roger that,” simply means, “Order received.” However, in the military, some people infuse ROGER with a bit more intention and define it as, “Received, order given, expect results.” When used that way, it is so much more than an acknowledgment. 

It’s an accelerant. 

It bypasses the over-analytical brain and stimulates action because, in some situations, thinking is the enemy. 

I’m not suggesting that you should follow every order like a robot. 

After you’ve been knocked down, it’s important to take some time to understand what happened and strategize your way forward, but you also must act. 

If you stay stalled out, sifting through the wreckage, you may find that you’ve been swallowed by it. 

We all love comeback stories because they teach us that setbacks have the power to propel us forward to our greatest successes, but your fate depends on your approach. 

After an injury or failure, your mind wants to either spin out into overthinking or fall back into numbness and complacency, and it takes practice to short circuit that process. 

“Roger that” is a ticket back to your life, no matter what happens. 

You may be laid off, run down, flunked out, cut, or dumped. 

You could be a stressed-out, bullied young kid, an overweight veteran with no prospects, or simply handed a pair of crutches and told to sit tight on the sidelines for as long as it takes to heal. 

The answer is always “Roger that.” Scream it out loud. 

Tell them all that you heard what they had to say and that they can expect your very best in return. 

And don’t forget to smile. 

A smile that reminds them that you are most dangerous when you’re cornered. 

That is how you respond to a setback. 

It’s the most efficient way to deal with adversity and come out clean.  Casey had heard what happened, and he assumed I’d be demoralized, but when he stepped into his office after lunch, I was already there, doing pull-ups, my knee immobilized in an air cast, my crutches leaning against his back wall. 

I’d had enough time to digest my situation and had only one question for him. 

“Do you think I’ll be healthy by the second week of October?” I asked. 

“Healthy enough for what, exactly?” “Moab 240.” He looked baffled, so I explained a bit about the race. 

He thought it was all a joke and turned to Kish to confirm his suspicions. 

“He’s not even remotely kidding,” Kish said. 

Casey could see in my eyes how serious I was, so he grabbed my file and read the summary of both MRIs aloud. 

It was all there. 

But just as it was with any diagnosis I had ever received, there was a challenge buried in the bad news. 

Casey missed that, but I didn’t. 

“Let’s not have any expectations,” he said. 

I smiled and nodded. 

“Roger that.” Having a target allowed me to strategize and prioritize. 

It wasn’t just about healing. 

Whenever something sets me back, I always set a goal, something tangible to shoot for, that keeps me task-oriented and prevents me from being consumed by the  sorrow of whatever is going on. 

But it’s important that your goal isn’t too readily attainable. 

I like to set audacious goals during dark times. 

Too often, people are convinced that they are challenging themselves by aiming to accomplish something they’ve done countless times before. 

I hear it whenever someone comes to me for training advice, which is a lot. 

Spoiler alert: it rarely goes the way they’d hoped. 

Recently, someone asked how to best prepare for a half-marathon. 

“Why are you running a half-marathon?” I asked. 

“You’re already training, so why not a full marathon?” He tripped over his tongue trying to come up with a satisfying answer, but I already knew why. 

He was training for something he knew he could do. 

I’m not picking on him. 

That’s how most of the world operates. 

Very few individuals step outside the box and attempt to stretch their limits. 

They rule out the spectacular by default. 

They put a hard cap on their own performance way before game day. 

The fact that I’d put Moab out there would keep me dreaming big through the drudgery of rehab, and it also set me up for the possibility of doing something special. 

It didn’t guarantee it. 

Not by a long shot. 

My body would have to respond to all my effort and commitment. 

I’d have to prove that I could run long distances again in order to make it to that starting line, but if all of that lined up, I would be rewarded with a unique and rare opportunity. 

That is, to come back from injury and earn redemption in Moab. 

The fact that I believed that I was capable of that, despite my condition, gave me confidence and strength. 

Strength that was mine to keep. 

Strength I could rely on even if it turned out that my rehab went nowhere and it became clear that I couldn’t run like I used to. 

That was my worst-case scenario, and if it happened, I already knew what I would do. 

I’d set another unreasonable goal and get back to work. 

During my long days of rehabilitation, I envisioned what the immediate future might bring, starting with the worst-case scenario and working forward from there. 

Locking eyes with the worst-case is always my starting point in any endeavor because it removes the fear of failure, prepares me for any and all outcomes, and keeps me leaning net positive from jump.  Whatever happens to us in life, we must aim to keep things net positive. 

When you have a bad day, it’s tempting to call it an early night and try to forget about it, but if you go to bed in the red, chances are you’ll wake up that way, and all too often, that type of negativity snowballs. 

When your entire day is messed up, make sure that you achieve something positive before lights out. 

You’ll probably have to stay up a bit later to read, study, get a workout in, or clean the house. 

Whatever it takes to go to bed in the black, get it done. 

That’s how you stay net positive on the day to day, and when that becomes automatic, it will be so much easier to see any emotional tripwires coming, which will help you strategize around them. 

In Montana, that meant I had to keep an open mind and stay grounded in reality. 

I knew my goal was far-fetched, and I didn’t necessarily expect to be able to finish Moab 240. 

Maybe I could run fifty miles? Maybe I could knock out one hundred? In this situation, the worst thing that could possibly happen was I don’t even start the thing. 

There was an even better chance that it would be canceled like everything else because of the coronavirus. 

I could live with all of that because there are always other races, and I knew I would emerge from this experience with five months of intense training and rehabilitation, which could only help me going forward. 

Two weeks in, I still had no idea when I would be able to run again, yet I remained focused on and worked toward my unreasonable goal, which allowed me to turn all the discomfort and frustration I was feeling into nutrients that primed me for growth. 

Meanwhile, the news was impossible to ignore. 

The first viral wave had swept across the nation, leading to lockdowns, overflowing hospitals, mask mandates, and a general population used to living very comfortable, predictable lives losing their collective grip in the face of tragedy and adversity. 

Many things in life are masked by circumstance. 

My weak, degrading knees had been disguised by strong quad muscles that could compensate for the joint’s lack of stability, and now, my whole life had been upended. 

The coronavirus exposed society’s lack of stability. 

It showed us that national unity is fragile and that the social structures and habits we’ve relied on can be vaporized at any moment. 

In the spring of 2020, life had become real, and suddenly, everybody was home and a lot of us were feeling exposed. 

The unemployment rolls swelled, people were sick and dying, rent went past due, schools were shuttered, and supply chains ground to a halt. 

That’s exposure on a global level. 

Everything was upside down, and it was scary, frustrating, and unpredictable, and a lot of people did not pass the test. 

They were caught unprepared. 

I wasn’t.  We all have one thing in common. 

We are here, stuck in the game of life, often subject to the whims of forces beyond our control, but we never train for it. 

We dedicate ourselves to external goals, whether they are rooted in fitness or school or work, as if they are isolated events, somehow disconnected from the totality of our lives. 

When everything we do is an opportunity to get better at the game of life itself. 

My life and my commitment to do what needs to be done even when I don’t want to prepared me for the pandemic, but only because I’ve come to see everything I’ve done and been through as training. 

I am a student of life. 

I carry around a notebook. 

I keep logs. 

I study all the upswings and down currents of my days as if the final exam is tomorrow. 

Because we all have an exam tomorrow. 

Whether we realize it or not, every interaction, each task is a reflection of your mindset, values, and future prospects. 

It’s an opportunity to be the person you’ve always wanted to be. 

You don’t have to have survived trauma or become a physical beast to train for life. 

We’ve all been challenged physically, emotionally, and intellectually, and we’ve all failed. 

Don’t be shy about digging through your lost archives. 

No matter how irrelevant those experiences seem now, they count because they were all dry runs for whatever comes next. 

This awareness that everything we do is merely training for the next episode is like a filter that expands your perception. 

When you get assigned something at work or school that you don’t want to do, step into a conflict you didn’t see coming, someone close to you gets sick or dies, or a relationship falters, you will see these challenges as new chapters in life’s textbook, which you can study to make sure that the next season of loss won’t be such a kick in the knees. 

Not just for you, but more so for the people around you. 

We all know that training is required to make the cut in competitive sports, get into the best schools, and compete for the most coveted jobs because that’s what it takes to be prepared. 

If the pandemic proved one thing, it’s that everyone can be better prepared to handle life’s sudden dark twists. 

After a month of intense rehab, I went for a three-mile run to evaluate how far I’d come. 

While my pace was pedestrian, I was shocked at how different my stride felt. 

I had always had more of a scooting running style, unable to stride it out. 

But on this first run, my whole body absorbed the impact when my foot hit the ground, not just my knees. 

That was a major improvement I could build upon, which is exactly what I did.  As always, my ace in the hole throughout this process had been Kish, but her time in Montana had come to an end, so I shifted gears into straight-up monk mode. 

My whole existence revolved around training, visualization, and recovery. 

Some of that time I spent with Casey. 

And while it’s a fact that he came up with PT I’d never heard of before—like hitting the VersaClimber with pressure cuffs looped around my legs and utilizing a high-speed muscle-stimulation machine during abdominal and leg workouts—for every hour I spent with him, I put in another five-plus hours on my own. 

Most people who attempt to recover from an acute injury see their physical therapist a few times a week for an hour at most, yet they make that therapist their leader and convince themselves that it is the therapist’s job to fix them. 

We can’t rely on others to get us to where we need to be. 

We need more personal ownership and self-leadership. 

When I was struggling in school, my mom brought in tutors a couple of times. 

The first time around, it didn’t help much because I only cracked my schoolbooks when that tutor showed up once a week. 

Instead of using her as a guide to help me figure out how to learn better on my own, my tutor became a glorified homework coach. 

That situation didn’t last long, and I fell further and further behind. 

The second time we hired a tutor, I had my mind set on graduating and passing the ASVAB, and it worked. 

Not because the second tutor was better, but because I was committed to my own success and put in work on my own. 

Casey helped me a lot, but he wasn’t my leader. 

He was a consultant. 

I was in charge of my own rehabilitation, and I worked at it up to ten hours a day, seven days a week, because I was on the clock. 

I needed to build strength and rehabilitate in a timely fashion, or Moab would never happen. 

I tightened up my diet to lose any excess weight and ease the load on my knees. 

I incorporated heart-rate training for the first time in years. 

I dipped back into cross-training. 

I swam, rowed, and spent hours on the Jacob’s Ladder and the AssaultBike. 

I was open to any exercise with a high suck factor that I could maintain for long periods of time while sparing my knees. 

My sleep was the best it had ever been. 

And with every workout and each passing day, the dog got hungrier and hungrier. 

Operation Moab Redemption was on track. 

Of course, whenever David Goggins feels like he’s got it all figured out, instant karma bites back. 

I endured bouts of intermittent swelling and continued to have my knee drained. 

In fact, five days before the race, we drained a baseball-sized Baker’s cyst behind my knee because it was inhibiting my newfound range of motion. 

Yeah, I still had issues, but I certified my knee as “good enough,” and on October 7, I toed the line. 

That was a major accomplishment. 

As far as I was  concerned, I was already in the black, and whatever happened from here would be gravy. 

Which freed me up to run my tail off. 

I was shocked at how good I felt and kept waiting for the wheels to fall off. 

Around mile seventy, I started to feel a tendon above my left ankle, and while it hurt like hell, I tried not to focus on it. 

My attention was dedicated to following my blueprint to a T. 

Around mile 130, I ran out of water during the hottest time of day. 

It was ninety degrees, I went through one hundred ounces quicker than ever and became dehydrated several miles short of the next aid station. 

My pace went from brisk to sluggish, and licking my lips wasn’t helping a whole lot. 

While dehydration was a concern, I also had much bigger issues. 

My new stride put a lot more pressure on my left ankle. 

It held up well for the first part of the race but had hit its limit, and the pain was no longer something I could ignore or move to the back of my mind. 

It was loud. 

We called ahead, and Kish was able to have water, pickle juice, and electrolytes ready when we arrived at the aid station at around two in the afternoon. 

I was comfortably in second place, about an hour behind the leader. 

The only shelter was our support vehicle, and I sat shotgun while I hydrated. 

Kish placed ice packs under my arms and on the back of my neck, and I placed one in my groin area, all the trigger points that bring the core temperature down quickly. 

The rest of the crew left us alone. 

I got so cold so fast that pretty soon, I was jackhammering, and this time I surrendered to it. 

Kish sensed my concern. 

“Something is bothering you,” she said, “but I can’t help you if you don’t tell me what it is.” I nodded and took off my left shoe. 

My anterior tibial tendon, which sits above the ankle joint, was swollen as thick as a rope, and any movement at all felt as if I were piercing my foot with a red-hot blade. 

The pain was so palpable that even Kish was clenching her teeth when she picked up the phone to call Casey. 

I had asked Casey to join the crew because it was obvious that the old blood-and- guts routine I’d relied on for so long wouldn’t be enough this time. 

My forty-five- year-old body was breaking down, and I had a feeling I’d need his expertise somewhere along the way. 

Trouble was, he was resting back at the crew cabin in Moab and couldn’t get to us for an hour and a half. 

That was on me. 

I should have made sure he was at every aid station, especially this deep into the race, but it wasn’t in the blueprint.  I’d been awake for about thirty-six hours straight by then, and all I could do was close my eyes and try to get some sleep while awaiting his arrival, but between the heat, my ankle pain, my racing heartbeat, and stress from the running clock, I couldn’t relax. 

I kept picturing the race leader scampering ahead like a jack rabbit while I was stuck. 

“Thanks for all the rehab, bro. 

I now have a new stride, and my ankle is jacked,” I said with a wry smile. 

Casey had arrived and was inspecting my foot and ankle from every angle. 

The joint was partially dislocated, and my tendon was extremely puffy, as if it were getting ready to pop through my taut skin. 

“Tell me you can fix it.” He set my foot down gently and nodded, his hands on his hips. 

He had this look in his eye that reminded me of the medics that hang around Hell Week. 

Those guys are a special breed. 

They witness a lot of suffering but are programmed never to show sympathy or tell you to quit. 

Your bone could be coming out of your skin, and they will blow on it, tape it up, and say, “You’re good to go.” Casey’s demeanor was just like theirs, which convinced me that he’d figured something out to keep me moving, but it would be evil, and I would have to suck it up! “This tendon wants to rupture,” he said. 

That startled me. 

Kish too. 

“It’s okay. 

I can prevent the rupture and stabilize it enough that you can continue to run, but it’s going to hurt like hell.” For the next hour, he scraped my puffy tendon with a blunt, metal instrument while I lay back on his portable treatment table wearing blinders. 

The only way I can describe the pain is that it was so bad, I could only laugh or cry. 

And I chose laughter. 

“Used to be that the only people stupid enough to think that running 240 miles was a good time were White people,” I said while Casey dug into my tendon, trying to move the fluid enough to slide my joint back into place. 

“Then I showed up!  “You all realize I’m choosing to do this, right? That this is my choice! Not only that, I’m paying for it. 

I paid for this guy right here to fly to Utah to torture me with a blunt instrument in the middle of nowhere!” The harder Casey scraped my tendon, the louder my howls of laughter became. 

We are talking out-of-control, breathless belly laughs. 

Pretty soon, the whole crew was dying. 

When I first limped to Casey’s table, I’d been pissed off, and the crew looked somber. 

They had all been excited when I was running with the leader for the majority of the first ninety miles. 

They’d watched me perform and helped me strategize to maintain my iron grip on second place while I waited for the back half to make my move, only to witness yet another setback. 

Something almost always breaks down for me. 

That’s no secret, but it’s frustrating to find yourself in the same position over and over. 

The crew felt bad, but I didn’t need or want their sympathy. 

I couldn’t use it. 

Sympathy has no power. 

Humor, on the other hand, picks everyone up. 

It is a huge morale booster. 

Laughing at yourself and the absurdity of life and your own goofy choices gets the endorphins flowing and the adrenaline pumping. 

It helped me take the pain and distracted my crew from the fact that the rest of the race would almost certainly devolve into a walk fest. 

They all thought so because it was obvious that my ankle was seriously injured, and they knew from the tone of my voice and my laughter that I wasn’t about to quit. 

A person who refuses to quit has a lot of tools at their disposal, and I didn’t use humor merely as a numbing agent or a tool of strategic distraction. 

I used it to lock in even deeper. 

The more Casey worked on me and the louder my team laughed, the clearer I could see that my race wasn’t close to being over. 

Keep laughing, I thought to myself. 

Wait until you see me on the back half of this course. 

Turned out that all that laughter had reawakened the sleeping savage within.  More than three hours after I’d arrived at the aid station, my ankle was back in joint and wrapped in six types of athletic tape to prevent me from flexing it. 

It was almost like a cast, but Casey assured me that, despite how it felt, it could take some pounding. 

“This joint needs to move,” he said. 

“It’s gonna hurt, but moving on it is the best thing for it.” In other words, Merry Christmas. 

After being down for three and a half hours, and now four full hours behind the leader, it was time to see what I could do. 

As luck would have it, Ms. 

Kish was next up as pacer. 

As we left the aid station, Jason, another member of my crew, approached Casey. 

“Think it will hold up?” he asked. 

“We’ll know at the next aid station,” Casey said. 

A few seconds later, I reappeared on the trail below, and Kish could barely keep up. 

“Or you can turn around and see for yourself.” Prior to the race, Kish selected the very same section she’d enjoyed so much in 2019 for her shift as pacer, and I’d been looking forward to this moment for a year. 

Of the entire 240-mile course, I’d visualized this section right here far more than any other, and as soon as we were on the trail, I pushed the pace. 

Four miles in, Kish grimaced, glanced at her smartwatch, and looked puzzled.    Getting dialed in at mile 140  Final ankle adjustments at mile 140 “I don’t think we went this fast last year,” she said. 

“Oh, you noticed?” I asked, smiling to myself. 

“Call Casey and tell him it’s on!” I accelerated uphill, which took Kish by surprise. 

As pacer, it was her job to stay with me, and she sprinted to catch up. 

In fact, to her great displeasure and for the  first time in the race, I was running every hill. 

Finally, when we arrived at the bottom of another incline, she grabbed my arm to stop me. 

“Don’t you want to walk this?” she asked, breathless. 

“Okay,” I said, laughing to myself, but before we reached the top, I took off again. 

Kish is a very good runner, but she wasn’t expecting to be in a workout this deep into my race. 

Especially after all the talk about ruptured tendons. 

I could see it. 

I could hear her breath. 

She started calling out hills well ahead of time. 

Unless I called for intervals first. 

Several times, I told her we would run for five minutes and walk for three, only to stretch those five-minute intervals to twenty and then twenty-five minutes. 

I enjoyed watching her stew in the unknown. 

Was I torturing sweet Kish? Yes. 

Yes, I was. 

But don’t feel too bad for her. 

I had my reasons, and I know what makes her tick. 

Kish is extremely warm, refined, and polite, but don’t let the smooth taste fool you. 

Look who she fell in love with. 

That lady is a thug, just like me. 

There’s some serious dog in that woman, and she does not tolerate any weak sauce. 

When we first got together, she kept mentioning how there had always been something missing in her past relationships. 

No one ever pushed her enough. 

She was never challenged, and she loves to be challenged. 

In fact, she’d dogged her exes so hard so many times that during Moab 2019, when she saw me suffering on terrain she handled so easily, I couldn’t help but imagine what she might be thinking. 

And it was mandatory that I earn back any respect that I’d lost in these here hills. 

I knew I’d done my job when she finally said, “I don’t remember this section being so hard.” Once again, I laughed, and laughed out loud. 

We finished Kish’s section ninety minutes faster than in 2019, and I was only getting stronger, but now, it was time to venture into the high country and tackle the terrain that threatened my life the year before. 

As the trail pitched up in altitude toward a ridge that loomed like a coiled dragon, I couldn’t shake the fear. 

I was afraid of how my body would react after being awake and running for forty hours. 

I  was terrified that my longtime lung issues would return with a vengeance. 

I was scared I wouldn’t make it. 

I’m afraid a lot, but I’ve learned to flip fear by facing whatever it is I’m scared of head-on. 

When I first started to face my fears, I was tentative. 

That’s normal, and the emotions and discomfort I felt were proof of how potent this process can be. 

My anxiety stirred and my adrenaline pumped as my mind edged closer to what I was so desperate to avoid. 

But within all that energy is a mental and emotional growth factor that can lead to self-empowerment. 

Just as stem cells produce a growth factor that stimulates cellular communication, muscle growth, and wound healing in the body, fear is a seedpod packed with growth factor for the mind. 

When you deliberately and consistently confront your fear of heights or particular people, places, and situations that unsettle you, those seeds germinate, and your confidence grows exponentially. 

You might still hate jumping off high things or swimming beyond the waves, but your willingness to keep doing it will help you make peace with it. 

You may even be inspired to try to master it. 

That’s how a kid who was afraid of the water his whole life became a Navy SEAL. 

Some people take the opposite path and hide from their fears. 

They are like villagers terrorized by rumors of a dragon to the point that they cannot leave their own property. 

They cower, and that dragon, who they have never seen themselves, only gains strength and stature in their minds because when you hide from whatever it is that freaks you out, that growth factor works against you. 

It will be your fear that grows exponentially while your possibilities become ever more limited. 

I had forty miles of steady altitude gain in front of me. 

That is a lot of time to contemplate last year’s breakdown, and quick cuts of me doubled over, begging for breath did flash in my head, but each step up onto another hump of the dragon’s spine confirmed my commitment to the task at hand. 

Until I became the knight who turned up in that village one quiet evening, sharpened my sword, and slayed the dragon. 

In 2020, the thin air did not trouble me. 

My lungs were clear, and I ran so well that my pacers had trouble checking me, but it all came at a cost. 

A vicious rash had  erupted on my butt, my entire left foot was one giant blister, and after lasting for nearly sixty miles, the careful tape job that supported my ankle was unraveling, along with my focus. 

I was in so much pain, it was difficult to walk, much less run, and impossible to think. 

Goggins the savage had fled the scene, and it was David who topped out at mile 201 and hobbled into the aid station. 

That rash stung so bad I crab-walked to the porta potty without a word. 

Kish tailed me with a clean set of clothes and an industrial-sized tub of Desitin diaper cream. 

When she yanked my drawers down, she gasped at the ugly scope of work. 

My butt cheeks had turned to hamburger meat. 

They were seeping, but Kish got right up in there and smeared that zinc-based cream wherever it had to go until her hands were covered in my blood. 

That’s true love. 

Each time she touched the rash, an electric shock of agony zipped up my spine and snapped my jaw shut. 

For an encore, Casey lanced and taped my blisters and rewrapped my ankle. 

That didn’t feel too good either, but I was too tired for another comedy show. 

The entire process took an hour, which was too long, but I didn’t mind at the time because I was too deep in the hurt locker to consider anything but survival.  The dogs hurting at mile 201    Mike and me heading out at mile 201 The pain was bordering on biblical as my pacer, Mike, and I started out again and scraped along at a zombie’s pace. 

My butt felt like it was being sliced and fileted with rusty razor blades with each step. 

My blisters burned, and it seemed like it was a matter of time before that tendon in my ankle snapped like a rubber band. 

Six miles in, we came across a campsite toilet set up by a lake. 

I lied and told Mike I had to hit the head. 

In reality, I was desperate to get off my feet. 

With thirty-three miles left, I’d hit my breaking point, and all I wanted was for this race to be over. 

Pain had never stopped me in an ultra race before. 

Yet, there I was, in a fugue state, ducking and hiding in the outhouse, quaking in my running shoes. 

That’s when Goggins reappeared and found me there. 

Goggins knew that the only way to deal with pain is to run straight through it, so he knifed David, stuffed him down the toilet, and took over. 

From that point on, I performed at a level I didn’t think was still possible for me. 

I used Mike as fuel and raced against him like he was my competitor. 

I dropped him on a descent. 

Long, boring, downhill terrain is his only weakness as a runner, and it’s my strength. 

Anything long and boring is my strength, and I put several minutes on him. 

Mike is a very successful guy. 

He works in finance in New York City, and he’s an accomplished ultra runner. 

He is not used to being dropped, let alone by someone two hundred miles into a race, and it made him angry. 

I slowed down and let him catch up, and when he did, he called Kish to tell her we were running well ahead of schedule, which shocked her because she was at the crew cabin doing laundry and didn’t expect to have to be back on course for several hours. 

Then, he called his wife, who is also an elite runner, and fumed about how I’d dropped him. 

He wanted me to hear how he felt, and when he hung up, he  started barking at me too. 

He took my behavior as a “screw you,” but it was my respect for Mike that encouraged me to try and drop him. 

I knew how great a runner and competitor he is, and I wanted to strike a nerve. 

I was picking a fight with a guy who loves a good fight because I knew it would bring more out of both of us, which is what I needed. 

Just as I’d hoped, he took it as a personal challenge. 

I’d inflicted pain and humiliation on him, and it made him surly enough to serve some right back to me. 

At that point, Moab 240 disappeared, and it became a seventeen-mile race between two alphas who were throwing down. 

He went from running and walking to hammering, and it hurt both of us. 

By that point, I’d covered 220 miles, and he’d run eighty, and we still clocked sub-eight- and then sub-seven-minute miles, and attitudes were everywhere. 

Somewhere in there, we decided to be friends again, and he looked over at me, mystified. 

“I’ve never seen this before,” he said. 

“You’re a freak. 

You can lift heavy and run like this? Your ankle and knee are all messed up, you’re two hundred miles into this race, and you drop me?” I get that kind of thing a lot from friends and strangers. 

They read about me taking on incredible challenges and frequently performing at a high level or witness it themselves, and they think I was born for it. 

That I have some innate quality they lack. 

Even after Can’t Hurt Me, many people still feel that way, when in fact, the opposite is true. 

I was born with birth defects, very few prospects and raised in hell, but I found a way. 

Mike knew my whole story, but he’d experienced something he’d never seen before. 

He’d watched me defy my broken body and not just refuse to quit but show out in a way that defied logic. 

“I’m not a freak,” I said. 

“I’m just a guy who believes in himself more than most. 

I am aware of what we are all capable of and that to get there, I have to harness every bit of power and energy I can. 

Power that is within all of us and all around us. 

I use your weakness as strength. 

I use your aggravation as strength. 

I ignite my competitive spirit with yours to get me moving even faster. 

Because if I can drop a hard man like you this deep into a race, what does that say about me?”  Mike had gone from surly to giddy by the time we hit the next aid station. 

Our goal was to get there in seven hours. 

We arrived in five. 

I was exhausted from racing him, but there was only an hour and a half of daylight left and sixteen miles still to run, which meant I had to keep it moving. 

During my rehab in Montana, Casey started to run with me, and he’d impressed me enough that I asked him to take me home. 

Barring catastrophe, I had second place locked, but before taking on each new section, I set micro-goals on the fly. 

The terrain ahead was filled with rolling hills and narrow trails littered with cobbles and boulders. 

My goal was to keep my average pace faster than twelve and a half minutes per mile. 

If I did that, I’d finish with the fifth-fastest time ever. 

We smashed those splits. 

Even after the sun dropped and our headlamps came out, we were a pair of speed goats. 

We bounded from one boulder to the next and flew down the narrow singletrack, past sheer drop offs and the shadows cast by the area’s abstract red-rock formations. 

We clocked a few 6:15 miles. 

The gravel and dust we displaced flew up like puffs of smoke from our heels. 

Stars glittered above, and the brightest one was my mythical North Star that led me into yet another state of flow and an entirely new dimension. 

Until that moment, I’d considered 2007 to be my athletic peak. 

I was thirty-three years old back then and chewed up 100-mile races like Kit Kats, but I was not yet the mental beast I’d become at forty-five years old. 

My 2007 self was a hard-core savage in his athletic prime. 

That guy would run through cinder block walls, but he was less flexible and aware, less strategic. 

I’m not sure my younger self would have even considered running 240 miles five days after having his knee drained. 

The final section of Moab 2020 was the best I’d ever felt on road or trail, the fastest I’d ever moved so deep in a race, and when the first city lights twinkled below us, I knew that redemption was mine at last. 

I crossed the line in a state of euphoria. 

It wasn’t the brand of bliss you may be familiar with. 

It was the Goggins version: nasty and electric. 

I practically spoke in tongues as I talked to myself, to my demons, to the mountains, to the dark night sky, and to my North Star. 

“You don’t know me, son!” I howled. 

“You don’t know me, son!”  The sparse crowd cheered, and my team laughed when I hit the dirt and knocked out twenty-five push-ups because I still could. 

I’d been in second place most of the race. 

When I left the mile 140 aid station, I was four hours behind the race leader, but I ran one of the fastest back halves of Moab 240 ever and finished in 62:21:29, just ninety minutes behind the winner. 

The savage was now in full bloom, and he had an unquenchable thirst. 

On the drive home, Kish and I discussed our Thanksgiving plans. 

We were heading to her family’s place in Florida for the holiday, and I told her how back in the day, when I traveled as a recruiter, I used to sign up for any ultra races I could find if they were on the way to where I was going. 

I called them layovers. 

She tapped the matrix and found a layover in Maryland the week before Thanksgiving. 

It was called the JFK 50 Mile. 

I signed up on the spot and finished in 7:08:26, good enough for twenty-fifth place overall. 

Casey had been inspired by his own performance in Utah and met us out there to compete in his first ultra. 

The final twenty miles were a monumental struggle for him, so after my race was over, Kish and I found him on the course, and I paced him all the way home. 

Which is how my fifty-mile layover became a sixty-two- miler. 

I couldn’t have been happier with how both races went. 

While my joints were sore from the pounding and so much time on my feet, my muscles recovered faster than ever before. 

I felt as if I were hitting an athletic peak I couldn’t have seen coming. 

The next day, we flew from Maryland to Florida. 

On Wednesday afternoon, my phone lit up. 

It was an old friend gushing about a new event he’d recently heard about, the Across Florida 200. 

It wasn’t a race in the true sense. 

There was no mass start or centralized logistics team, and it was 100 percent self-supported. 

It started on the Gulf Coast and utilized roughly 180 miles of trails and dirt roads and twenty miles of tarmac as it slithered like a fugitive python northeast across the state to finish where the Atlantic Ocean meets the shore. 

Runners had seventy-two hours to complete the course, and nobody had managed to do it yet. 

Some dude hit 120 miles. 

Another team made it about fifty miles before packing it in.  Kish had worked hard crewing me in back-to-back races and had been looking forward to the weekend and downtime with her family, so I tried to put the AF 200 out of my mind. 

But the prospect of running the most ridiculous turkey trot of all time spun in my head like an alien moon. 

Anytime I closed my eyes, it was there, shimmering like a disco ball, daring me to try. 

I’m always looking for more fuel because I do not mesh with this modern age, which has a way of sucking the life force out of me. 

We all must mentally recharge from time to time. 

Some people like to golf. 

Others enjoy watching football on Sundays. 

I go out in the backwoods and crush myself for several days at a time. 

This was an unexpected opportunity to fill my mental tank to the brim, and after our Thanksgiving feast, the dog was still hungry for scraps, so Kish and I drove north, and on Friday morning, I tapped the Gulf tideline and started running east. 

I ran for two and a half days, past hillbilly hunting caravans and drunken drag racers. 

I jogged on the shoulders of thrumming highways and beneath buzzing powerlines and bloody sunset skies. 

I cut through private property and navigated swampy, humid forests home to nearly every wild animal Florida had to offer. 

We’re talking vipers, bears, gators, and twenty different varieties of bloodsucking insects. 

I swear I saw them all. 

It was a damn Florida Country Safari! With about thirty miles to go, in the dead of night, I was running on the side of a busy highway when a cop flashed his rollers and cut me off. 

I hadn’t seen a single Black person since the race began, and given what I had seen of North Florida, I braced for the worst, but that White cop greeted me with a handshake and an eager smile. 

He was a fan, had been following my progress on Instagram, and was hoping to bump into me. 

After a few friendly words, he sounded his siren, parted the sea of zipping headlights and brake lights, and escorted me across the road, where Kish had parked and was waiting with hot food. 

Then, he radioed his buddies. 

Soon, we had three police cars and four cops standing around us, taking pictures and chopping it up. 

They were all very polite and respectful. 

However, the world being what it is, not five miles later, on that same highway, a beat-up truck crept alongside me. 

I turned and glanced at the kid in the passenger seat just as he hollered the N-word at me.  I shook my head as they drove on, but his ignorance didn’t faze me. 

That was his problem. 

In fact, the word he’d hoped would wound me bounced right off me. 

I was on the verge of running five hundred miles of ultra races in less than six weeks. 

That is a monumental output, and the reason I pulled it off is because I am focused on being my best at all times. 

When you live that way, there is no time to donate to small-town racists or anyone else whose perspective is defined by their narrow minds. 

At this point in my life, the supposedly offensive, unspeakable word with its dark, violent history has been reduced to a chain of harmless symbols: consonants and vowels that don’t mean a thing. 

With two miles to go, the heavens opened up. 

Cool, cleansing rain poured in sheets and buckets and washed my sweat, filth, and blood onto the sandy road. 

“The rain god’s a punk!” I howled. 

“I wish it were raining harder!” I followed that road as it unspooled through the trees until it spilled onto a white- sand beach lapped by the Atlantic Ocean. 

I had officially run across Florida in less than three days and become the first to complete the AF 200. 

I was in the best shape of my life at forty-five years old, and I couldn’t wait for 2021. 

With my North Star lighting my way, I envisioned a career year of shattered personal bests. 

With that in mind, the following February, I scheduled an appointment with an orthopedist to discuss the nagging pain I felt in both my knees. 

I’d heard he offered a new stem-cell treatment that might help, but he suggested surgery instead. 

It would be a simple arthroscopic clean-up job, he said. 

He would cut away frayed edges, remove floating tissue and promised noticeable improvement after two to three weeks of recovery. 

I agreed, but as surgery approached, I became more apprehensive about it. 

I’d been through hack-job surgeries before, was running well despite the pain, and didn’t want to lose what I had. 

Yet, whenever I considered the entire picture, I came back to what he told Kish and me in his office. 

The risk was low enough that there was  no downside. 

We’d all agreed on a simple objective: to clear away the source of my residual pain so I could continue to grind. 

The morning of my surgery, February 10, I went for a long run. 

With at least two weeks of downtime ahead, I needed to get one last one in. 

Then I showered, shaved, and drove to the hospital. 

My surgeon met me in recovery. 

The operation took longer than he’d expected, but he didn’t mention complications or alter our rehab-and-recovery plan before I was discharged with not so much as a set of crutches. 

For the next several nights, the pain was so bad I became nauseous. 

I had to use the walls as crutches to get to the bathroom from bed. 

I could barely put any weight on either knee, and I knew I was not supposed to feel this bad after such a simple procedure. 

Most people can walk immediately and are back to grinding within two weeks. 

Something twisted and wrong had to have happened in that operating room, but the doctor didn’t say anything. 

And I sensed something else too. 

I would never run again.     Evolution No. 

7 As far back as I can remember, I craved a seat at the table. 

Even when I was a teenager, I knew that one day I wanted to sit at that mythical table among the greats in my field. 

I suppose you can trace it back to a deep desire for respectability. 

I desperately wanted to be somebody because I felt like a nobody. 

That’s why I was drawn toward Special Ops at such a young age, and when I realized I was flunking out of school, it’s why I was so motivated to change. 

I knew that I would never arrive at that table unless I took myself and my life more seriously. 

And yet, as much as I wanted to be among the greats, the decision-makers, the anointed ones, I spent years waiting for a formal invitation. 

I don’t know how many times I visualized receiving that embossed golden ticket to the dinner I dreamed of, where steak and lobster tail would be served by those who admired and wanted to be near us, but I expected to have to prove something first. 

I figured if I inserted myself into the proper organization or structure and met the standard consistently, someone would notice me—a mentor or guide—and give me directions to where all the power players gathered. 

I was not looking to be at the head of their table. 

I wasn’t delusional. 

I just wanted a seat. 

In the meantime, I became one of the waiters who served the elite. 

Before long, some of my peers, who in my mind weren’t as qualified as I was, were seated at the table too. 

I sucked it up and served them, still hoping that one day I’d be tapped on the shoulder and someone would pull out a chair for me. 

I wanted so badly to be anointed and validated by my superiors. 

I wanted to be told, “You have finally arrived, David Goggins. 

You are now recognized to be one of the best.” Trouble is, that formal invitation rarely arrives, and for me, it never did, but while I waited, I observed my so-called superiors at close range. 

I watched them work, studied how they presented themselves, and realized that most of them were fairly common people. 

And I wanted to be uncommon. 

Because it is the uncommon story, the uncommon leader, that inspires others to seek more of themselves, work harder, and rise to the occasion.  It’s no secret that the vast majority of people prefer to be led because it’s easier to follow someone else than to break your own trail. 

Yet all too often, we are led by bosses, teachers, coaches, and powerful officials who wear the rank and title and deploy optimistic speeches, management lingo, and strategies they learned in some university or seminar or from their colleagues at that table in the executive suite but do not inspire us. 

Perhaps it’s because they talk way too much and do far too little. 

Maybe it’s because their own lives are out of control. 

Whatever the case, over time, it becomes obvious that these men and women who we once admired from afar don’t have what it takes to lead themselves, let alone anyone else. 

Yet when they reject or ignore us, we allow that to limit us and our ability to influence the organization we belong to and the people around us. 

It doesn’t have to be that way. 

Too many people mistake leadership for what happens at the top, in the spotlight, around that mythical table, when some of the most powerful leaders are hard at work in the shadows. 

They know that opportunities to make a difference in the lives of their neighbors, family, coworkers, and friends are ever-present. 

They wield massive influence without having to say much, if anything at all, and the first step in becoming one of these unsung heroes is learning how to become a self-leader. 

Back in 1996, when I was a twenty-one-year-old airman in a Tactical Air Control Party unit (TACP), I subscribed to the basic definition of leadership like almost everyone else. 

A leader was the person in charge. 

The one with the highest rank, the fat salary, and the doting support staff. 

A leader had the power to hire and fire and make or break entry-level peons like me. 

I never thought a person who had no particular authority over me would end up being such a major influence in my life. 

I had no clue that I would soon get a crash course in self-leadership and how it can turn anyone into a powerful example that is impossible for others to ignore or ever forget. 

Typically, TACP is the liaison between the Air Force and the Army, and I was stationed at an Army base in Fort Campbell, Kentucky, where the renowned Air Assault School is located. 

Air Assault is known to deliver “the ten hardest days in the U.S. 

Army.” Nearly half of every class flunks out because it combines hard physical training with intellectual rigor as candidates complete an onslaught of physical evolutions and learn how to sling-load choppers with heavy equipment, such as Humvees and fuel blivets. 

Everything must be rigged in a precise way to ensure the load will break away upon delivery at the right place and time. 

As an Air  Force guy assigned to Fort Campbell for four years, I knew two things. 

I was guaranteed to be served orders to attend Air Assault School and that if I didn’t graduate with that badge on my uniform, it sent a clear message that I lacked motivation and was an underachiever. 

Now, did I prepare as if those orders would arrive at any moment? No, I did not. 

I had everything I needed to become Honor Man at my fingertips, but I didn’t tailor my workouts to Air Assault School. 

I had access to the obstacle course and the two ruck march courses and never got out there for a single training run. 

I also failed to crack the books or leverage the guys I worked with who had firsthand knowledge of the sling-load test. 

There were new Air Assault classes running every month. 

I could have trained and studied hard, then requested Air Assault School when I was ready. 

Instead, I waited for those orders to land in my lap, and when they did, I showed up unprepared. 

The fun started with a physical test on Day Zero, when candidates must run two miles in under eighteen minutes before completing that hellacious obstacle course made up of rib-crushing wall climbs, a rope climb, and a balance test on a network of beams that lead to platforms as high as thirty feet off the ground. 

There were so many people there that nobody really stood out, and a good chunk of them failed to achieve the basic benchmarks required to be admitted into the school, but I made it. 

Before dawn on Day One, I approached the arches that formed the gateway to the Air Assault campus alongside a man I hadn’t noticed the day before. 

Though it was dark, I could tell he was about my height and not much older than me. 

Now that we officially belonged to the Air Assault class, whenever we crossed under the arches, we were required to perform a set of “five and dimes.” That’s five pull-ups and ten elevated push-ups. 

We would cross beneath those arches several times a day, and we always had to pay the same toll. 

We grabbed the bar at the same time. 

I knocked out the standard five pull-ups, but by the time I’d hit the dirt and finished my push-ups, that guy was still on the bar. 

I stood and watched him perform far more than five pull-ups. 

Satisfied, he dropped to his feet, fell forward, and hammered a lot more than ten push-ups. 

Only then did he report to class. 

We had a hard day of PT ahead. 

It would include many more push-ups and pull-ups, and the rest of us were content to meet the standard, hoping we would have enough energy to survive the next ten days, yet this man was ready to smoke himself on the dark early morning of Day One. 

It was the first time I’d ever seen someone do more than what was required. 

I’d always thought my job was to meet the standard laid out by the brass, but he was clearly not concerned with  what was expected of him or what was to come. 

“Who is that guy?” I asked nobody in particular. 

“That’s Captain Connolly,” someone said. 

Okay, so he was an Army captain, but in the Air Assault class, he had no authority at all. 

He was one of us, just another student trying to earn his badge. 

At least, that’s what I assumed. 

A few minutes later, we lined up for a six-mile march loaded down with thirty-five- pound rucksacks. 

I was only a year and a half out from running six-minute miles and coming in close to the top in almost every run in Pararescue training. 

In the run-up to Day One, I’d actually had delusions that once again, I’d be at the front of the pack on all the runs and might even win a few, but I had been measuring myself against the general population. 

My mind was set on that bell curve where 99.999 percent of the population operates, and when it came to getting after it, I figured I plotted out near the top compared to the rest of the class. 

Didn’t matter that I wasn’t 175 pounds anymore and that I’d gained thirty-five pounds from lifting heavy and eating garbage. 

I still looked strong and fit to most people, myself included. 

Oh, but I was softening up nicely. 

When the instructors yelled, “Go,” not everybody went out hard. 

We had ninety minutes to complete the course, and at least half the class intended to walk a good chunk of it. 

I planned to run/walk the whole thing, knowing that I would bank time running, which would put me out front. 

For the first two-plus miles, I was in the lead group of five guys, including Captain Connolly. 

Most of us were smoking and joking. 

We were running fairly hard, but we were also ripping on each other, and within twenty-five minutes, I was gassed. 

The Captain, who had been silent the entire time, had barely started to sweat. 

While we were wasting valuable energy trash-talking, he was self-contained and dialed in, focused on kicking our collective butts. 

Around mile three, the road pitched up into the limestone hills, and the whole group seemed to downshift at once and started to walk as if we shared a common mind. 

We were breathing heavily, and I knew walking the ups and running the flats and downs would be the best way to finish with a decent time and still have something left in the tank for the next several hours of physical training. 

Captain Connolly did not downshift. 

He ran on ahead of us, silent as a ghost. 

Some of the  guys squawked about catching him when he inevitably blew up, but I was certain we wouldn’t see him again until the finish line. 

Captain Connolly was an entirely different animal. 

He was off the bell curve—an outlier. 

He was not one of us. 

It does something to you when you are running close to what you perceive as your limit (back then, I still topped out at 40 percent) and there is someone else out there who makes the difficult look effortless. 

It was obvious that his preparedness was several levels above our own. 

Captain Connolly did not show up to simply get through the program and graduate so he could collect some wings for his uniform. 

He came to explore what he was made of and grow. 

That required a willingness to set a new standard wherever possible and make a statement, not necessarily to us, but to himself. 

He was respectful of all the instructors and the school, but he was not there to be led. 

The ruck march ended at the arches, and on our approach, we could all see Captain Connolly’s silhouette as he completed pull-up after pull-up after pull-up. 

Once again, he made a mockery of the standard as the rest of us were content to file our five and dimes. 

Compared to our peers, our performance was well above average, but after watching Captain Connolly flex, it didn’t feel like much. 

Because I knew that while I had been fine with just showing up, he’d prepared for the moment, attacked the opportunity, and showed out. 

Most people love standards. 

It gives the brain something to focus on, which helps us reach a place of achievement. 

Organizational structure and atta’ boys from our instructors or bosses keep us motivated to perform and to move up on that bell curve. 

Captain Connolly did not require external motivation. 

He trained to his own standard and used the existing structure for his own purposes. 

Air Assault School became his own personal octagon, where he could test himself on a level even the instructors hadn’t imagined. 

For the next nine days, he put his head down and quietly went about the business of smashing every single standard at Air Assault School. 

He saw the bar that the instructors pointed to and the rest of us were trying to tap as a hurdle to leap over, and he did it time and again. 

He understood that his rank only meant something if he sought out a different certification: an invisible badge that says, “I am the example. 

Follow me, and I will show you that there is more to this life than so- called authority and stripes or candy on a uniform. 

I’ll show you what true ambition looks like beyond all the external structure in a place of limitless mental growth.”  He didn’t say any of that. 

He didn’t run his mouth at all. 

I can’t recall him uttering word one in ten days, but through his performance and extreme dedication, he dropped breadcrumbs for anybody who was awake and aware enough to follow him. 

He flashed his tool kit. 

He showed us what potent, silent, exemplary leadership looked like. 

He checked into every Gold Group run, which was led by the fastest instructor in that school, and volunteered to be the first to carry the flag. 

When the sling-load test came around, I thought that might be his kryptonite. 

I was hoping that he was just a physical stud, a freak of nature. 

I wanted to find a flaw in him because it would make me feel better about myself. 

But when the instructors asked for a volunteer to be the first to take a test that half the class would fail, he didn’t raise his hand or say anything out loud. 

He simply stepped forward to be tested on helicopters, reach pendants, sling sets, proper rigging, and inspection before anyone else. 

He aced that too. 

He won every last physical evolution, was at the top of the class on each of the exams, and raised the level of the entire group. 

We all wanted to be more like him. 

We wanted to compete against him. 

We used him as a measuring stick, as someone we could emulate, because he gave us permission to go beyond the standard. 

Thanks to him, I volunteered to carry the flag on one of the Gold Runs, and to this day, it is one of the hardest runs I’ve ever completed. 

Without the use of your arms, it’s impossible to generate the same power and momentum, and that flag feels like a parachute tugging you backward. 

However, I was nowhere near his physical condition, and when the twelve-mile ruck march came around on Day Ten—our final test in Air Assault School—all I could do was watch him disappear into the distance as he shattered the Air Assault record for the fastest twelve-mile time ever. 

I graduated mentally and physically exhausted but felt almost nothing when I was awarded the wings I thought would anoint me as a made man around Fort Campbell. 

I was still too puzzled and irritated by Captain Connolly’s level of effort, which felt almost confrontational. 

It wasn’t a lot of fun to be around him, yet I relished every second. 

He made me uncomfortable because he exposed my lack of dedication to giving my best effort each and every day. 

Being around people like that forces you to try harder and be better, and while that is a good thing, when you are inherently lazy, what you really want are some days off. 

The Captain Connollys of the world don’t give you that option. 

When they are in your foxhole, there are no days off.  His conditioning was clearly off the charts, and I’m not talking about the physical aspect alone. 

Being a physical specimen is one thing, but it takes so much more energy to stay mentally prepared enough to arrive every day at a place like Air Assault School on a mission to dominate. 

The fact that he was able to do that told me it couldn’t possibly have been a one-time thing. 

It had to be the result of countless lonely hours in the gym, on the trails, and in the books. 

Most of his work was hidden, but it is within that unseen work that self-leaders are made. 

I suspect the reason he was capable of exceeding any and all standards consistently was because he was dedicated at a level most people cannot fathom in order to stay ready for any and all opportunities. 

Those who have not learned to self-lead show up to their lives like I did Air Assault School. 

They don’t prepare or have a plan of attack. 

They wait, get shotgunned into something—a school, a job, a physical test—then wing it. 

Think about how much information is out there on the internet. 

Any place you want to build your skills, from boot camp to Harvard Business School, from EMT certification to an engineering degree, is described online in granular detail. 

You can study the prerequisites and start on the coursework before you are even admitted. 

You can prepare as if you are already there so when the time comes and you do land that opportunity, you are ready to smash it. 

That’s what a self-leader does, no matter how busy their lives are. 

Not because they are obsessed with being the best, but because they are striving to become their best. 

Self-leaders rarely rest. 

In the heat of battle, they become dolphins who sleep with one side of their brain on alert and one eye always open so they are ready to outsmart, outswim, or battle their predators and they are awake enough to float back to the surface and take another breath. 

In order to sustain that amount of energy output, self-leaders return again and again to the organizing ideals of their lives. 

They live for something bigger than themselves, and because of that, their lives swell and glow with an energy that others can feel. 

It can also start a chain reaction that challenges and awakens people to the untapped power coiled within themselves. 

The power that they are wasting with each passing day. 

Setting an example through action rather than words will always be the most potent form of leadership, and it’s available to all of us. 

You don’t have to be a great public speaker or have an advanced degree. 

Those things are fine and have their place, but the best way to lead a group is to simply live the example and show your team or classmates, through dedication, effort, performance, and results, what is truly possible.  That’s where I’m at now. 

Thanks in part to the example Captain Connolly set and because I was aware enough to recognize that he was a rare breed and humble enough to learn from him. 

However, as you know, the transformation didn’t take right away. 

Sadly, once Air Assault School was over and Captain Connolly was out of my life, the spark faded, and I fell back into my old ways. 

While I never stopped thinking about that ten-day experience, I didn’t have it within me to self-lead just yet. 

I should have taken the lesson from those ten days and applied it to the next fifty years of my life. 

I should have imagined Captain Connolly watching me each and every day. 

Believe me, if you think you’re being watched, you live differently. 

You’re more detailed and squared away. 

That’s not how it went for me. 

It would be another three years of slippage before I exhumed the Connolly files from my personal archives and studied them to become a self-leader. 

Two years in the SEAL Teams was all it took to realize that nobody was going to show up to coach or guide me to my seat at the table, but by then, I wanted off the bell curve. 

I wanted to make my own opportunities and eat alone at my own table. 

I wanted to become an outlier. 

I went on to beat Captain Connolly’s twelve-mile ruck-march time, which had been tattooed on my brain for six years, while doing an eighteen-mile ruck march at Delta Selection. 

I did it on a much harder course with a heavier pack, and for the first twelve miles, I imagined that he was still out there in front of me, dropping breadcrumbs, daring me to exceed the standard he set years ago. 

He was the first one to show me how to do more with less and that it was not just possible to dig deeper but mandatory if you are striving to be your best self. 

When I eclipsed his time, I realized I was no longer chasing Captain Connolly. 

From then on, every school, course, race, or record I took on became an arena for my own self- development. 

When you live like that, you are usually far beyond the influence of parents, teachers, coaches, or other traditional mentors and their philosophies. 

In order to stay humble, you’ll need to make sure you are living up to your own code. 

A lot of great organizations have inspiring mission statements. 

Elite military units are built around an ethos or creed that defines how their men and women are supposed to conduct themselves. 

Each time I arrived at a new school or endeavored to join a new Special Operations unit, I studied and memorized the ethos or creed, and those words never failed to move me and most of my peers, but it’s human nature to become complacent. 

No matter how powerful the organizational ideals, even well- meaning people who love what they do—especially those with seniority—will lack the mental endurance to live the creed on the day to day. 

And if most people within an organization don’t truly follow or adhere to the founding principles, then what are they really worth? So, I took my own oath to self:  I live with a Day One, Week One mentality. 

This mentality is rooted in self- discipline, personal accountability, and humility. 

While most people stop when they’re tired, I stop when I am done. 

In a world where mediocrity is often the standard, my life’s mission is to become uncommon amongst the uncommon. 

We all owe it to ourselves to stand for something. 

Principles give us a foundation— solid ground we can trust and build on as we continue to redefine what’s possible in our own lives. 

Sure, some will be put off by your dedication and level of effort. 

Others will call you obsessed or think that you’ve gone crazy. 

When they do, smile and say, “I’m not crazy. 

I’m just not you.” Don’t rely on some other group’s ethos or company’s mission statement to be your guide. 

Don’t walk around aimlessly trying to find purpose or fit in. 

Mine your core principles, and come up with your own oath to self. 

Make sure it is aspirational and that it challenges you to strive and achieve, and live by it every day. 

When everything gets murky and twisted and you feel alone and misunderstood, revisit your oath to self. 

It will ground you. 

At times, you will need to revise your oath given the shifting priorities that arise with life changes, but don’t water it down. 

Make sure it is always strong enough to serve as your daily compass as you navigate life and all of its challenges. 

Living by this oath—your oath—you will never need anyone else to lead you. 

Because no matter what happens, you will never be lost. 

Who will you become and what do you want to stand for? Are you ready to be the standard? If you are willing, share your oath to self. 

#OathToSelf #SelfLeadership #NeverFinished Chapter Eight    8. 

Play until the Whistle Six days after surgery, my knees hadn’t improved, and I could barely move at all. 

I had an appointment on the books to check in with my surgeon, who took one look at my swollen knees and decided to drain them. 

Instead of synovial fluid, he pulled seventy-five mL of dark-purple deoxygenated blood out of my right knee and thirty mL from my left. 

Ten days later, the swelling had returned, and he had to drain both knees again. 

I could tell by the look on the doctor’s face that the pain I was in and the persistent swelling were not what he’d expected. 

Something was truly wrong. 

While he gave me the third round of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) injections, hoping that might jump-start my healing process, he offered the first clue of what had actually happened in that operating room.  The deoxygenated blood drained from my knees post-surgery was alarming. 

I’d gone in for a simple clean-up job on the meniscus, the pad of cartilage that acts as a shock absorber between the tibia and the femur (the shinbone and the thigh bone), but when he attempted to trim the cartilage, his instrument failed. 

My meniscus and the articular cartilage that clung to the ends of my bones were too thick and tough. 

He said this was due to Wolff’s Law, a phenomenon discovered by a nineteenth-century German surgeon who found that when an increased load is placed on bones over time, those bones will become denser and much stronger. 

That sounds like a good thing, but in the knee, it can lead to deterioration or  irregularities in the cartilage, which cause arthritis. 

In my case, the meniscus layer of padding between the bones wasn’t thick and smooth like a rubber mat, it was gnarled and twisted like bark and rough like mortar. 

And the articular cartilage was just as tough. 

Instead of cutting easily, it was near bulletproof. 

My torqued connective tissue literally broke the surgeon’s high-dollar medical shears. 

“Even your cartilage learned to stay hard,” he joked. 

I didn’t laugh much because these were details I should have heard in recovery instead of over two weeks later. 

That bothered me. 

However, I couldn’t help also feeling a perverse sense of pride. 

There had been so many times in my life when I felt injured or sick during an intense physical evolution but refused to quit, which forced my body to become the great compensator. 

I have adapted to deal with several medical conditions over the years—some I’d inherited, others I’d acquired —to complete dozens of strenuous, multi-day feats of endurance. 

In my doctor’s befuddlement, I saw medical proof of that forced compensation. 

I’d put a heavy load on my bones for so long they had grown dense as stone and transformed my cartilage into cement that was almost impossible to cut through. 

But, after several failed attempts, the doctor did manage to cut through it. 

While recognizing my body’s compensation for what it was, a physiological adaptation that enabled me to continue to grind at a high level, he still used a cookie-cutter approach to the surgery. 

My knees were undeniably damaged prior to the surgery, but I could still function with them. 

Just a few hours before being wheeled into the operating room, I had run ten miles. 

Now, two weeks later, I’d limped to a stationary bike at the gym hoping to break a sweat and lasted twenty- two minutes before the pain overwhelmed me. 

I went from the Moab 240 to running across the state of Florida to twenty-two minutes on an exercise bike. 

I returned again to the doctor’s office a full month post-surgery, and when I told him how much anguish I was in and how little mobility I had, he downplayed it and in the next breath casually informed me that during the surgery, he’d drilled into one of my bones. 

At no point during the run-up to surgery had he ever mentioned that as even a remote possibility, and despite seeing me in recovery and twice since then, he had never mentioned that he had drilled two small holes into my left femur. 

Which was strange because that is not a procedure a doctor is likely to forget.  He said that after removing most of the cartilage in my left knee, he wanted to tap my bone marrow so it would leak out, puddle up, and create a clot that over time is thought to mimic the padding provided by an intact meniscus. 

He also mentioned that at some point during the surgery, he’d cleared the OR of anyone who was not a vital part of the process. 

This revelation didn’t make me proud. 

It angered me. 

I have had several major surgeries in my life, and I’d never received important and unexpected details piecemeal. 

Surgeons are trained to explain the surgery at the earliest opportunity, but this guy wasn’t playing by those rules. 

Starting on the day after surgery, there were several times Kish wanted to reach out and ask the surgeon to explain my level of pain and immobility because they were way beyond the expectations he’d laid out. 

I felt the same way but did my best to control my emotions and avoid hitting the panic button. 

On the way home from his office after learning about the holes he drilled, however, my anxiety spiked. 

That evening, Kish and I did some investigating, and what we read online was unsettling. 

From what I gathered, it seemed that he’d given me some type of microfracture surgery and never said a word about it. 

After several sleepless nights, I texted the doctor at around five in the morning and told him I needed some answers, straight up. 

To my surprise, he replied right away and continued to reiterate that the knees were only going to get better now that they’d been cleaned up. 

I challenged him on the microfracture procedure. 

He said a microfracture surgery has a minimum of five holes, he’d “only” drilled two, and that they “should” be filled in by this point. 

He said pretty soon I’d be back to running like I always had and that nothing would hold me back. 

I’d had a hunch that this doctor wasn’t telling me the full story, but that text exchange confirmed it. 

I could no longer trust him. 

No matter how pure his motives may have been, he’d made questionable, unilateral decisions, performed poorly, left me bone-on-bone, and then fed me unsettling details bit by bit. 

There was no excuse for any of it. 

On March 17, I stepped onto a treadmill for the first time since surgery. 

I was at physical therapy, and the staff didn’t know it yet, but I’d already decided it was my last day. 

My right knee was feeling a bit better. 

My left felt much worse than it did before surgery and was collapsing on the medial side. 

The therapists who had been monitoring my progress were affiliated with my surgeon, and despite my pain, they wanted to see me jog it out for five minutes. 

I ran for forty-two.  Not because it felt good. 

Every step hurt, but I kept going because I knew this would be my last run for the foreseeable future, maybe forever, and considering how central running had been in my life for so long, five minutes didn’t feel like enough of a farewell. 

Five grinding miles of agony had more meaning, and when it was over, I powered down the treadmill, stepped gingerly to the floor, and hobbled right out the door. 

As I drove home, I felt conflicted between my commitment to remaining patient enough for the great compensating machine to do its work yet again and my fear that it really was all over this time. 

Despite some of the voices around me that had already accepted my demise as gospel, I didn’t want to believe that. 

I couldn’t. 

Because ever since I decided to not be fat anymore, my whole life has been wrapped around my physical being. 

While mindset has always been number one for me, I achieved my mindset through physical training and monumental physical challenges that provided an immediate return on investment. 

That is not the only way to become mentally tough, but it does happen faster when you run thousands of miles, swim long distances in cold water, or do thousands of pull-ups. 

When you invest that volume of pain and suffering in yourself, it will produce mental toughness. 

In other words, my life and my sense of self, from the time I was twenty-four years old until the day of surgery, were built on training and competing hard to become mentally strong. 

And they were taken from me in ninety minutes. 

Not by accident or freak injury, but by one doctor who failed to live up to his Hippocratic oath: first, do no harm. 

I know it was unintentional, but there was major harm done. 

I couldn’t sweat out the stress, so it was difficult for me to process all the emotion and frustration. 

There were times that even I wanted to surrender to self-pity. 

I was tired of Goggins, tired of always fighting the fight, and while I abhor excuses and excuse makers, when I checked myself in that mirror each morning and every night, I told myself the clean truth. 

It’s over. 

You can’t do it anymore. 

And I found some comfort there. 

I felt like a quarterback at the line of scrimmage reading the defense and clocking nothing but pass rushers with blood in their eyes. 

The linemen, linebackers, and defensive backs would outnumber and easily overwhelm my blockers, sprint around the edge, bull rush inside, and the pocket would collapse. 

Unless I averted  disaster before it struck. 

I had to call an audible—yell out a new play at the line of scrimmage loud enough for my whole squad to hear—but as I leafed through the playbook in my mind, I couldn’t find any workable solutions. 

It’s not like this was new territory for me. 

I’d been facing steep odds and calling audibles all my life, but this was the biggest of them all. 

When your entire being is rooted in a particular way of life and it gets taken from you, what is the proper play call? As restless and frustrated as I was, I knew patience was the only play for now. 

Sometimes, the best thing the quarterback can do is throw an incomplete pass, avoid losing any more ground, stop the clock, and regroup. 

While I believed my knee was as good as it was going to get, I still wanted to give it time to see if the pain would ease or my stability would improve at all, so it was not the time to tinker. 

As devastating as it was to go from running over two hundred miles a pop to not being able to walk down a flight of stairs without my left knee collapsing, I had to avoid the temptation to evaluate my situation on the daily and weekly. 

Instead, I panned back and attempted to see it all with a wide-angle lens. 

The summer firefighting season was shot, and I wouldn’t be running again anytime soon, which meant I didn’t have to scramble for an immediate solution. 

2021 was a wash. 

It was all about next summer and the following season. 

That reassured me because it meant that there was plenty of time left on the clock. 

I didn’t have to score or even move the ball right away. 

I just had to watch and wait. 

I decided to wait a full ninety days (from the day of the surgery) to give my body time and hopefully—there was that word again—compensate for the surgeon’s poor judgment and errors. 

However, when those ninety days were up, nothing had changed. 

That all-out blitz was still coming for me, and the time for waiting was over. 

I needed to call a play. 

For the next three days, Kish and I parked ourselves at the kitchen table and scoured the internet. 

We skimmed peer-reviewed studies, medical journals, hospital websites, and physician bios and found that microfracture surgery was usually the last resort for meniscus problems, and when that didn’t take, joint replacement was the logical next step. 

Joint replacement is a type of amputation. 

The edges of your shin and thigh bones are cut away to accommodate the artificial knee. 

I was not near ready to go there.  Then, on day four, at exactly the same time, Kish and I happened upon an article featuring the work of a world-class surgeon at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York City. 

Dr. 

Andreas Gomoll was one of the few surgeons in the United States capable of conducting meniscus and cartilage transplants to heal knees so far gone that almost any other orthopedist would consider them candidates for joint replacement. 

This was the audible I’d been looking for. 

According to what we read, a meniscus transplant worked far better than microfracture surgery. 

It not only reduced pain and restored functionality and quality of life, it might even allow me to get after it to the level I was used to. 

That mattered to me because I still had unfinished business. 

I’d been carrying around the same lofty goal since 2014. 

It promised all the physical and psychological demands of Special Operations and was fueled by the same valorous spirit, but whenever I got close to it, the opportunity slipped through my fingers. 

I wanted to become a smokejumper. 

Smokejumpers are airborne wildland firefighters. 

They parachute into the backwoods to put down fires before they become raging infernos and make world news. 

My pursuit of smokejumping is the reason I got into wildland firefighting in the first place. 

After years of frustration, I finally had an opportunity to join a smokejumper crew in Montana back in 2020, but my knees weren’t willing to cooperate, and after my failed surgery in 2021, I could only assume that smokejumping would remain out of reach. 

On June 7, I met with Dr. 

Gomoll in New York. 

He evaluated the MRI scans and took some X-rays of my bowlegged left leg, and my misalignment shocked him. 

The degeneration in my knee was more severe than he’d anticipated. 

“I have no idea how you were able to run a mile on those knees,” he said. 

“Let alone fifty, one hundred, two hundred miles.” Dr. 

Gomoll knew how far I’d traveled to come see him, but as much as he wished he could help, I wasn’t a viable candidate for a meniscus transplant because my knee was too far gone. 

He offered up an unloader brace that might relieve some of my pain but knew it wasn’t much of a solution because nobody wears a bulky brace twenty-four hours a day, and a brace alone would not give me my life back.  There wasn’t much left to say. 

He lingered in silence and absorbed my obvious disappointment. 

It wasn’t simply that I was in pain or couldn’t work out. 

I would also have to swallow the fact that the hard-core jobs I’d always admired and strived for were no longer for me. 

He turned to leave, but when he was halfway out the door, he stopped cold and looked back. 

“Hey, try the unloader brace for a couple of months,” he said, “and if it helps, there may be one other option we can discuss.” “I would appreciate it if we could discuss it right now,” I said. 

I was desperate for any flicker of possibility at that point. 

Apprehensive, he nodded, sat down across from me again, and explained an uncommon procedure that isn’t taught much anymore known as a high tibial osteotomy, or HTO. 

It’s a surgery that realigns the knee joint to relieve pressure and pain, but to achieve that, he would have to saw into my tibia, open up a five-millimeter wedge to create a gap in the bone, and then screw in a tapered metal plate to cover the gap, which would eventually be filled in with new bone tissue. 

“By no means is this a slam-dunk fix,” he said, “which is why I hesitate to bring it up.” He went on to explain that the outcome had a lot to do with the patient and how determined they are during rehabilitation, but he knew my background and wasn’t worried about that. 

He was reluctant because he knew that both of us could do everything right and my body still might not react well to the procedure. 

Some knees cannot be helped, and until he was in the operating room, he couldn’t say for sure if mine was one of them. 

“Sometimes, the surgery falls short of solving the problem, and the last thing we want to do is make things worse.” “Definitely not,” I said. 

“But say the surgery is a success, what would that mean for me?” “Depending on how long it takes for you to recover, eventually, you would have very few, if any, physical restrictions.”  “I’m in,” I said. 

He looked taken aback. 

Evidently, most people don’t leap at the chance to have him saw into their shin bone. 

“I still think you should try the brace first.” “You say if this works, I could do anything?” I asked. 

“Almost. 

Everything short of jumping out of planes, I suppose.” I paused to digest his statement. 

At first, it felt like another knife to the gut, but it wasn’t definitive. 

He supposed jumping out of planes would be off-limits, but he did not know me. 

“Okay,” I said, smiling. 

“No jumping out of planes. 

But Dr. 

Gomoll, you are one of the top guys at the best orthopedic hospital in the United States, and in your professional opinion, you don’t see any other options for me?” He blushed slightly at my assessment of his skills. 

He had a humility about him that I appreciated. 

“If you are committed to reclaiming what you’ve lost,” he said, “then I think this is the best choice for you, yes.” Some would look at those odds and consider resorting to an uncommon, painful surgery without a guaranteed outcome a massive risk. 

I suppose it boils down to what you can and can’t live with. 

A lot of people can live with a lot of mediocrity. 

Not only can they live with it, they are actually content in it. 

Well, Merry Christmas to them, but that does not work for me. 

Oh, I wanted to rest too, but not just yet. 

If there was even a chance that this was going to get me where I needed to go, then it wasn’t even a choice at all.  “Okay then, doctor,” I said. 

“Break the leg.” I had the surgery on June 30 and spent two nights in the hospital and another week in a New York City hotel room. 

How did I feel? Like someone had just sawed into my leg! When I attempted to stand, the pain level was a ten out of ten. 

The blood would rush to where that plate was screwed in, leaving me wincing and lightheaded. 

I scuttled around on crutches and had to shower while sitting in a chair. 

I iced and relied on electronic muscle and bone stimulation several times a day and did some basic physical therapy exercises while lying in bed. 

My flight home was nothing short of excruciating. 

Agony rolled through me in waves. 

I broke into a sweat and was borderline delirious as I thought back to my last meeting in Dr. 

Gomoll’s office before we left town.  Nothing short of breaking my leg was going to fix my alignment issues. 

“The realignment was a success,” he said, smiling and pointing at my latest X-ray. 

I was no longer bone on bone.  Up until that moment, he’d been hesitant to promise too much. 

I’d managed my expectations too. 

In the last days before surgery, I’d read countless articles, message boards, and forums on HTO recovery, and, to say the least, they were not encouraging. 

Most people took three to six months to walk normally. 

One article sang the praises of a runner who defied the expectations of doctors to complete a marathon eighteen months after his HTO procedure. 

For me, he became the gold standard. 

While running a marathon is no easy feat under any circumstances, it was nothing compared to what I would have to do in order to become a smokejumper. 

If that was even still possible. 

At my age, every lost fire season is a crucial missed opportunity, and I’d had to sit out the last two. 

The odds against me were astronomical. 

But now that Dr. 

Gomoll seemed convinced that I was on a different trajectory, I could not help but conjure scenes of smokejumper training. 

The film was grainy and in black and white, but the soundtrack was familiar. 

It was the brassy hum of “Going the Distance,” and it played on a loop. 

“How long before I can start training?” I asked. 

“While your knee isn’t an issue, the surgery site is. 

That will take some time to heal. 

But in a few weeks, you can probably go for a little spin on an exercise bike.” “A little spin,” he said. 

I got through the rest of that flight with visualization. 

I saw myself wobble to a stationary bike on those damn crutches. 

I watched the wheels turn and puddles of sweat gather beneath the crank as I spun for hours. 

On July 15, just over two weeks after my surgery, that vision became reality. 

I could barely get my leg over the seat and didn’t channel much power into the pedals. 

Anytime the leg hung loose, it would throb, as if the plate itself came with its own beating heart. 

Each pedal stroke was another reminder of how bad my knee still was. 

It was so painful I couldn’t help wondering why I was putting myself through it. 

I lasted thirty minutes. 

That doesn’t sound like much, but it was a monumental first step. 

The question now became Can I dial it up?  Almost nothing in life is constant. 

Conditions and circumstances are perpetually in flux like the winds and the tide, which is why my mind is never fixed. 

I tack and adjust, forever searching for my new 100 percent. 

Age, health, and the responsibilities we carry can be limiting. 

That doesn’t mean we should give in to those limitations or use them as excuses to let ourselves or our dreams go, but we can acknowledge them, as long as we are committed to finding out what we can still do given those limits—whether they be temporary or indefinite—and maximizing that. 

When most people undergo major surgery, they relax into the recovery time the doctor lays out. 

They accept their six- to eight-week vacation from the grind or their six to twelve months of leave. 

Before I was discharged from HSS in New York, I wanted to know precisely when I could get back into the gym and how hard I could push it. 

This felt like my last shot, and the stakes were too high to rely on a professional physical therapist. 

I know my body better than anyone and didn’t want any naysayers in the foxhole. 

The fate of my recovery and my future would be on me, and that kept me thinking proactively. 

Every day, thousands of people wake up to a life defined by newfound limitations that are difficult to accept. 

Maybe they’ve been diagnosed with a terminal disease or suffered a spinal injury. 

Could be they lost a limb or are suffering from PTSD. 

More often, the shifting circumstances are not nearly so dire. 

Sometimes, it’s good news that changes the equation. 

Maybe you are a new parent or landed a lucrative gig that demands ten- to twelve-hour workdays. 

Could be you recently got married, which means you have to consider more than just your own goals. 

No matter the variables, your new 100 percent is out there waiting for you to find it. 

The thing is, most people don’t want to. 

Because whenever you’re trying to find your new anything, it means you’re not who you used to be, and that can be depressing enough to give up the search. 

Some people use their new circumstances to dial down their effort level instead of adjusting their approach and still giving it their all to achieve their goals. 

You’ve got to work with what you have. 

I couldn’t run or ruck, but that didn’t mean I was out of the fight. 

No matter what you are dealing with, your goal should be to maximize the resources and capabilities you do have. 

If you’ve suffered a freak injury or received a diagnosis that changes everything, what does your new maximum effort level look like? A lot of people bide their time and wait to see what happens next, but a year or two later, they find they are still waiting. 

With every unfortunate turn in life,  no matter how heavy the weight, you have to be committed to pushing back against that pressure with effort. 

No matter your age, abilities, disabilities, or responsibilities, we must all stay committed to finding our new benchmarks. 

Because not only does that keep your mind engaged and your demons at bay, you actually might achieve things the old you never could have conceived. 

I’ve never been a faster runner than I was at nineteen years old. 

Back then, I could blaze a mile and a half in 8:10, but that kid would have laughed if you had asked him to run fifty miles at one time, much less 240. 

Of course, at forty-six and with a metal plate in my tibia, Moab 2020 felt like a lifetime ago. 

Prior to the surgery, Dr. 

Gomoll explained that it was unlikely that I would ever run another 100-mile race again and that medical clearance to run at all was TBD. 

That did not deter me. 

I would simply have to find another way to train hard. 

Ironically, on June 1, before I even knew who Dr. 

Gomoll was, I signed up for The Natchez Trace 444, a long-distance bicycle race held in early October. 

I didn’t think I would be healthy enough to compete in it. 

But I knew running wasn’t an option, so it made sense to set imposing cycling goals. 

When Dr. 

Gomoll casually suggested the stationary bike, cycling became my anchor point. 

I latched onto it with a white-knuckle grip and started climbing. 

It was not easy. 

Each morning, as I grabbed my crutches, I felt like I was twenty- four years old and 297 pounds again trying to run just one mile. 

My leg was badly swollen. 

Every pedal stroke was torture. 

The resistance was still very low, but the anguish made me sweat. 

I wanted to quit a hundred times but refused to give in. 

Like the fat David from long ago, I was worried if I stopped I might never start again. 

For a week, every ride began just like that, but instead of dialing it back, I upped my output. 

I was still on crutches, mind you. 

I was non-weight bearing for four weeks and on crutches for six, but I’d ride sixty minutes every morning and another twenty minutes in the afternoon as part of my rehabilitation program. 

My leg muscles were already getting stronger, and my resting heart rate was starting to drop. 

All of this represented progress, but those fledgling workouts and my two hours of stretching and range of motion work weren’t enough to convince me that I’d be ready to ride four hundred-plus miles by the first week of October. 

To stop the creep of negative thoughts, I occupied my mind.  Mental and physical fitness have always been intertwined for me, and though I’d missed two consecutive fire seasons, I decided to use my rehab time to gain more knowledge and skills in the event that my body bounced back enough to where even if I couldn’t smokejump, I could at least fight fires. 

One skillset that is attractive to a lot of fire departments is the Advanced EMT certification, but because of my travel schedule, I’d never been able to take the course. 

This was the perfect time, and I found an accelerated course not far from my place that was about to begin. 

After I signed up, I dug my old EMT textbook out of my closet, turned to page one, and refreshed my basic knowledge. 

As far as I was concerned, class was already in session. 

As always, my packed calendar worked to my advantage. 

Each activity fed into the next in a synergy of self-betterment. 

I had hours to study the human body and learn how to save lives, and I hadn’t spent this much time on a bike of any kind since I was training for RAAM in 2009. 

During my morning rides, I thought back to those long, peaceful days on the bike. 

Although running is what I’m known for, I’m actually a better cyclist. 

Yet, before I could seriously consider racing in October, I needed to get off the stationary bike. 

In mid-August, four weeks after my first thirty-minute ride, I called Dr. 

Gomoll and asked if he’d clear me for some road miles. 

“How long do you plan to ride?” he asked. 

“Four hundred and forty-four miles,” I said. 

He knew exactly how much pain I was still having and that this was my first day off crutches, but I considered it a sign of progress in our doctor–patient relationship that he did not laugh out loud. 

I’m surprised I didn’t laugh. 

Training for a 444-mile bike race on a stationary bike is a laughable offense. 

No serious cyclist would ever do that. 

Triathletes and professional cyclists who are forced to train indoors during winter hook their road bikes onto a trainer. 

All I did was up my two-a-days of spin classes to three-a-days.  Over the next several weeks, I became extremely lonely. 

All my physical therapy, study sessions, and bike rides were solo missions. 

It was monotonous and draining, and the worst part was knowing it would be exactly the same tomorrow and the next day and the day after that. 

Most mornings, it was difficult to find the energy to persist, but I did, and every time I mounted that bicycle, I felt a rush of victory that I only get when I overcome my own desire to dial it back or give up completely. 

It’s short lived, but the more you do it, the more powerful the feeling. 

Ten days before the race, my lower left leg was still extremely puffy. 

It was holding so much fluid that it looked and felt like memory foam. 

When I squeezed it, my handprint took several minutes to fade. 

Nevertheless, I dug my old racing bike out of storage and dusted it down. 

It was a Griffen, and back in the late 2000s, it was top of the line. 

By 2021, it was a relic, and they weren’t even making them anymore.  It took several months for the edema to go away. 

I hooked it up to my new bike trainer and rode for two hours and eighteen minutes. 

In total, I completed eight sessions on the trainer. 

My longest ride was four hours and thirty-one minutes. 

But I still hadn’t ridden my bike on the road when we boarded the plane for Nashville, just thirteen weeks after my surgery. 

The instinct for self-preservation can make you so careful that you become reckless. 

My lower leg was still at least partially hollow, and I’d been through too much to expose it to distracted, impatient city drivers. 

I couldn’t risk crashing. 

The Natchez Trace Parkway, on the other hand, is a smooth country road with very little traffic and no stop signs or turns, and I’d have a support vehicle. 

It would be as safe as road cycling gets. 

Unless, of course, you factored in the all-night ride and the sleep deprivation. 

However, because I was hesitant to expose myself to injury, as of the morning of the race, I still hadn’t ridden outside in years, I wasn’t accustomed to my brand- new racing saddle, and Kish had never handed me a water bottle or food while I was on the move. 

So, in the few minutes we had to work with before the start of the race, Kish and I practiced the crucial exchange in an indoor parking garage. 

The start was staggered, like a time trial. 

Every rider was on their own. 

I was one of the last to set off, and the early miles were a bit awkward as I relearned how and when to shift gears, but I soon settled onto the Natchez Trace Parkway, a scenic highway steeped in American history that unfurled like a smooth, undulating ribbon from Nashville, Tennessee, to Natchez, Mississippi. 

It rolled past creeks and swamps, traced the original trails used by merchants, explorers, and Native Americans, and skirted old indigenous ceremonial sites and trading posts. 

Mossy old live oaks arched and leaned over the two lanes from both directions, but I didn’t notice any of that. 

I was busy focusing on that white line as I hammered all day without a break, and by the time I crossed the Mississippi state line, I was in fourth place. 

I got through over two hundred miles in just under twelve and a half hours without much more than a pee break, but as the sun set, it became harder to ignore the withering pain in my leg. 

It was caused by the placement of that metal plate, which  pinched the hamstring attachment. 

I felt it every time my leg bent, and when you’re riding a bike for hundreds of miles, your leg bends an awful lot. 

When it finally became intolerable, I stopped in a turnout where Kish could roll up beside me. 

“This was a bad idea,” I muttered. 

“This was just dumb.” I climbed into the car, dragging my leg, annoyed that I’d put myself in yet another agonizing situation. 

I had only officially decided to go through with the race ten days earlier and hadn’t trained properly for it. 

I’d been doing spin classes for a few months and put in eight monotonous rides on a bike trainer while I watched ESPN. 

And yet, I’d still managed to ride two hundred miles. 

Put that way, it sounded like quite an accomplishment. 

More than enough to begin to convince me to pack it in. 

I closed my eyes and tuned in to the voice in my head. 

The one that is just fine with good enough. 

Two hundred miles! Who does that? Who rides two hundred miles thirteen weeks after major leg surgery? You’re a bad dude, Goggins! It was all true, except that during a 444-mile race, nobody hands you a merit badge for finishing less than half of it. 

A better question would be, Who rides 444 miles thirteen weeks after surgery? That sounds like a pipe dream, I know. 

That’s what I thought when I opened the car door and climbed aboard my old Griffen war horse once again. 

I didn’t think I’d last much longer, which is why my choice probably won’t make any sense at all to most people. 

They’ll consider it boneheaded to risk aggravated injury trying to finish the impossible. 

But Dr. 

Gomoll had assured me that I was not at risk of doing any damage to my knee and that the plate was secure. 

Plus, I know what we are all capable of when we are willing to think unreasonably and push past the point where almost everybody else would beg to stop. 

The pain wasn’t going anywhere. 

It came down to how much I was willing to endure. 

I thought about that when a few miles down the road, in the darkness of night, my North Star pushed aside two clouds, and Goggins rose from the ashes for the first time in almost a year.  Who rides 444 miles thirteen weeks after surgery? I do! I rode myself into a trance. 

Half the time, I didn’t even realize Kish was still behind me. 

I just followed that white line and kept cranking past all the historic roadside attractions and into the ghost world of runaway slaves and slave traders, Native American warriors, Civil War soldiers, and Lewis and Clark, and in my mind, I erased it all. 

I was writing a new history of the Natchez Trace. 

It was about the baddest person that ever came through that land on two wheels. 

With about eighty-five miles to go, it started to rain. 

I’d been riding on carbon fiber wheels all day and stopped to switch them out for aluminum wheels. 

I was still in fourth place, and by then, I knew I could manage the pain and that I’d make it to Natchez. 

I set out again at a comfortable pace and immediately noticed how much better I felt with the new wheels. 

I always preferred aluminum wheels and now remembered why. 

They were heavier and gave me an immediate return. 

I could feel the power I put down with every stroke and fed off that. 

I had no idea how far behind the leaders I was until I flew around a bend and onto a straightaway where I saw the next two riders up ahead, a few hundred yards apart. 

I breezed past them both with ease and accelerated all the way home. 

I was the fastest rider in the field over those final eighty-five miles and crossed the finish line on the banks of the Mississippi River in second place after riding 444 miles in twenty-five hours and change. 

The winner had trained for twelve months and finished just over three hours ahead of me. 

My first ride had been eleven weeks before race day. 

I was only seven weeks off of crutches and still couldn’t walk without a limp. 

There wasn’t any time to celebrate. 

I’d taken a few days off from my studies to get the race in, and as soon as I’d slipped my bike into its travel case, I cracked my textbook. 

That massive effort on the bike was already in the rearview because I could not fall behind. 

I studied at the airport and on the flight home, and within eight weeks, I graduated from my Advanced EMT course as valedictorian. 

In December, my attention shifted to the national exam. 

I stayed up until two in the morning for ten nights straight taking practice test after practice test. 

I answered over four thousand questions, and whenever I got something wrong, I cracked the  books to understand why. 

I didn’t like doing it, but it’s not easy for me to learn, so that’s the effort I must put in to be successful in the classroom. 

Most people who are lagging behind in school, work, or athletics aren’t willing to do what it takes to catch up and maximize their potential. 

They don’t outwork their classmates and competitors and simply meet the standards set by their teachers and coaches. 

They work enough to get that passing grade and then high step it into mediocrity and convince themselves that they did their best with what they had. 

But I have a high bar when it comes to defining effort and success, especially in the medical field, where guesswork won’t fly. 

Every incorrect answer on my practice tests represented someone’s life ruined or lost. 

This wasn’t a game or a sport to me. 

This was real world, and I wasn’t looking to pass and get certified so I could go out and perform my job adequately. 

Which is why even after I passed my boards, I went home that night and studied those few questions that I thought I missed until I knew them all by heart. 

In January 2022, I followed my North Star into the frosted upper reaches of British Columbia south of the Yukon border to explore the opportunity I’d long coveted. 

I met with a few senior members of the North Peace Smokejumpers in Fort St. 

John. 

It was thirty degrees below zero, the winds were howling, and the sky looked angry as they showed me around. 

I learned that most of the fires they deal with are caused by lightning strikes deep in the hostile wilderness miles from the nearest road, where few, if any, surveyors have ever been. 

Before I left, they encouraged me to apply. 

If I was accepted and made it through their arduous six-week training, which was set to begin in April, the workload promised to be intense.    A warm welcome to Fort St. 

John When my flight took off the following morning, the sky was clear enough to reveal the immensity of the landscape. 

There were layered mountains, granite peaks, and hundreds of miles of boreal forest rolling toward Alaska. 

I imagined dropping into it, and how terrifying and thrilling it would be, but the truth was I hadn’t jumped  out of a plane in years, I still hadn’t run a lick in ten months, and Dr. 

Gomoll said that the one thing I supposedly could not do on my surgically repaired leg was land under a parachute. 

You can work your tail off for decades, adapt, and evolve more than most, but no matter who you are or what you’ve done before, you cannot force something to fit. 

This time, even I had to admit that the odds were insurmountable. 

I’m often asked how I’d feel if my body rebelled and I could no longer run, ride my bike, or compete in any sport. 

It’s an easy answer because I already know what I’d do. 

It might take a few months for me to work through my frustration and recalibrate, but then, I’d go be great at something else. 

It had been six months since the surgery, and we were now less than two months away from my 4x4x48 Challenge, and I needed to see how it felt to run. 

While I’d been doing the 4x4x48 on my own for years, in 2020, I invited the people who followed me on social media to join me in the Challenge and encouraged them to push themselves a little harder while raising money for the charity of their choice. 

The point is to run four miles every four hours for forty-eight hours for a grand total of forty-eight miles. 

Over the past three years, we’ve collectively raised several million dollars for charities around the world. 

It’s an honor to reflect on the impact this Challenge has had in just a few years. 

Countless lives have been changed or influenced by the funds raised and the experience of grinding through a single sleep-deprived weekend. 

That’s the kind of thing that can happen when a group of well-intentioned individuals who want to be better come together to train for life. 

Although it was hatched as a running event, since the beginning, I’ve made it clear that if running isn’t possible, participants can walk, swim, or work out in the gym for about forty minutes every four hours. 

In 2021, in the wake of my initial knee surgeries, I couldn’t run either. 

So I devised a high-intensity circuit workout that made running four miles feel like a spa treatment. 

My goal was to run in 2022, just to see what was possible. 

In the second week of January, I stepped onto a treadmill for the first time in ten months for a run-walk workout. 

I ran for three minutes and walked for two and lasted five cycles. 

My left shin ached like crazy, but I continued to run every day and built up the mileage from there. 

Over the next several weeks, I took my running from the treadmill to the trails and finally to the streets while periodic updates from Fort St. 

John arrived via email.  Each one felt like a tease. 

Whenever I read about the physical fitness required and the tasks that awaited new recruits, I felt a flush of envy. 

But when I googled aspects of the training, I knew my leg was not up to the task. 

In the meantime, I took a job as an emergency-room medic in a big-city hospital on the wrong side of town. 

We were always busy and saw patients from all walks of life. 

I did my best to make myself indispensable during my twelve-hour shifts, and the care we delivered was top-notch. 

I tapped veins for IVs, cleaned up patients with ulcers on their skin and bloody stool dripping down their legs, and helped treat others who suffered cardiac arrests. 

When my patient flow slowed, I scrubbed down treatment areas and cleaned the workstations. 

You’d never catch me sitting down unless it was my lunch break. 

And before and after work, and on my off days, I trained and continued with my physical therapy.  Doing rounds in the emergency room I managed to complete the 4x4x48, and instead of leading everyone through it on Instagram Live, we took it out on the road and led several in-person group runs. 

The first event was in Chico, California; next was Sacramento, and we moved south from there. 

People of all ages and backgrounds converged, and like wild dogs, we ran in packs on singletrack trails and suburban and city streets. 

For the second-to-last leg, we more or less took over the famous bike path in Hermosa Beach. 

As the weekend progressed, I only got faster.  As much as I appreciated the turnout and enthusiasm up and down the coast, I’m an introvert, and being the center of attention is not natural for me. 

After a thousand selfies and high fives in Hermosa, we drove on to Costa Mesa, and I turned within to recharge during the ride. 

I also conducted a quick body scan. 

Although I still felt some burn in my left leg, I’d run forty-four miles in less than forty-one hours, was pleasantly surprised at how it was holding up, and knew I still had more to give. 

I was setting a new gold standard for HTO recovery. 

I wondered what Dr. 

Gomoll would say about that. 

The final segment was my fastest run of all. 

I was challenged by several people who may or may not have run every leg. 

That was the thing about the weekend. 

Some people came out to feel the energy and ran just once in forty-eight hours. 

I ran all twelve, and that final one was my fastest of the weekend. 

During the last half mile, I wasn’t even in sunny Southern California. 

I was way up north, where there is nothing but mountains and forests lit up by backcountry lightning strikes that have forged an airborne firefighting unit capable of meeting challenges that would make some of the hardest people I’ve ever met question their own toughness. 

I was kidding myself, of course. 

Smokejumpers in Canada don’t use Ram-air parachutes, which allow for feathery landings. 

They prefer to land hard and roll. 

Dr. 

Gomoll was probably right: if I landed like they did, my leg would likely snap into at least two pieces. 

But every statistician will warn you that whenever you deal in probabilities, there will be outliers. 

Always!    4x4x48 2022 in Hermosa Beach, an intimate run with eight hundred people. 

Photo by: Jerry Singleton (@gts310)     Evolution No. 

8 Most people live their whole lives without ever contemplating what it means to be great. 

To them, greatness looks like Steph Curry, Rafael Nadal, Toni Morrison, Georgia O’Keeffe, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, or Amelia Earhart. 

They put all the greats on a pedestal but think of themselves as mere mortals. 

And that’s exactly why greatness eludes them. 

They turn it into some untouchable plane, impossible for almost anybody to reach, and it never even crosses their mind to aim for it. 

No matter what I’m doing or which arena I’m engaging in, I will always aim for greatness because I know that we are all mere mortals and greatness is possible for anyone and everyone if they are willing to seek it out in their own soul. 

In Gogglish terms, greatness is a state of letting go of all your faults and imperfections, scavenging every last bit of strength and energy, and putting it to use to excel at whatever you set your mind to. 

Even if someone out there told you it was impossible. 

It is a feeling pursued by those rare souls willing to extend themselves beyond reason and pay the cost. 

In the late 1950s, Captain Joseph Kittinger was a pilot in the Air Force tapped for experimental aviation and skydiving duty in New Mexico. 

He wasn’t a household name. 

In fact, hardly anybody knew the first thing about him until August 16, 1960, when he donned a red, duct-taped pressure suit and boarded an open-sided gondola tethered to an onion-shaped helium balloon. 

He flew that rig nearly twenty miles high until he reached the thin atmospheric line where everything goes from blue to black. 

He’d traveled to a place where the horizon did not exist. 

He was above and beyond all previously known limitations. 

Suspended at 102,800 feet, he unclipped his harness and stepped into space. 

His free fall lasted nearly five minutes. 

His maximum velocity was 614 miles per hour. 

He plummeted over eighty thousand vertical feet before his primary chute opened. 

This was no Red Bull sponsored party. 

It wasn’t a television show. 

Kittinger wasn’t an entertainer, he was an explorer. 

A seeker of a new realm for the world—his flight and his jump helped make manned space flight possible—and also for himself. 

I don’t jump to earth from outer space, but I know that atmospheric line between blue and black. 

It is the glimmer of greatness that runs right through the human soul. 

We all have it. 

Most of us will never see it because to get there requires a willingness to extend yourself to the limit without any guarantee of success.  Then again, success is just another mile marker on the journey. 

Landing the jump and walking away while lighting a cigarette as if it were a typical day on the job made Kittinger look cool, but it didn’t make him great. 

His willingness to do it in the first place knowing that the chances of failure were high and everything it cost him made him great. 

It wasn’t a stunt to garner fame or publicity. 

It was merely an attempt to see what was humanly possible. 

Just as words can be redefined, never doubt that we can redefine ourselves. 

It can feel impossible at times because we live in a world filled with arbitrary boundaries and fixed social lines that are as thick as the walls around a fortress. 

Worse, we allow those walls to limit us in too many ways. 

The brainwashing starts early, and it starts at home. 

The people we grow up with and the environments we grow up in define who we think we are and what we think life is all about. 

When you’re young, you can only know what you see, and if all you are ever exposed to are lazy people, content with mediocrity or who convince you of your own worthlessness, greatness will remain a fantasy. 

If you live in the ghetto or in a dying industrial or farming town, where buildings are boarded up, addiction runs rampant, and the schools are a mess, that will factor into the possibilities others envision for you and you envision for yourself. 

But even privileged people can feel shackled by their circumstances. 

The vast majority of parents don’t know what greatness looks like, so they are ill-equipped and afraid to encourage big dreams. 

They want their children to have security and don’t want them to experience failure. 

That’s how limited horizons get passed down from generation to generation. 

Should we really be surprised that almost everybody has a knack for twisting their story to work against themselves? I hear it all the time. 

Privileged kids say, “I have too much, so I cannot develop the skills that you have.” The kid that came from nothing will tell me, “I don’t have enough. 

Therefore, I cannot develop the skills that you have.” No matter where someone is in life, they never fail to confess why they can’t get where they need to go. 

The minute they open their mouths, I see how limited their horizons are, and their sob stories come with the expectation that I will deliver a “become great” package to their front door. 

But that’s not how it works. 

Identity is a trap that will keep you in blinders if you let it. 

Sometimes, identity is what we are saddled with by society. 

Other times, it’s a category we claim. 

It can be  empowering to associate yourself with a particular culture, group, job, or lifestyle, but it can also be limiting. 

If you stick with your own too closely, you will be susceptible to groupthink, and you may never learn who you really are or what you can accomplish. 

I know people who were so obsessed with landing a specific job that once they settled in to that role, they clipped their own wings. 

They never moved on or attempted to try anything new, and that blocked them from evolving and developing new skills. 

Sometimes, we are misled by others who categorize us based on what they perceive as our identity. 

When I met with Navy recruiters, several tried to steer me away from SEAL training and into a different opportunity because I didn’t fit the mold. 

I was overweight, my ASVAB scores were low, and there was my skin color. 

Remember, I was only the thirty-sixth Black Navy SEAL. 

The recruiters weren’t trying to hurt me, and I don’t believe they were racist. 

They honestly thought they were helping me by presenting more realistic options. 

Usually, however, we mislead ourselves. 

Those of us who are struggling with our self-worth, like I was as a child, often build identities around the very things that haunt us the most. 

Not because we want to, but because subconsciously, we are convinced that is how everyone else sees us. 

You cannot allow what someone else may or may not think about you or the issues you’re dealing with to stop your progress. 

My environment and my history made me overanxious and stressed out. 

The color of my skin made me a mark. 

I was prejudged and vulnerable at almost every turn, and it was my job to defy all of that. 

No matter how troubled or hopeless or sheltered your environment is, it is your job, your obligation, your duty, and your responsibility to yourself to find the blue-to-black line—that glimmer—buried in your soul and seek greatness. 

Nobody can show you that glimmer. 

You must do the work to discover it on your own. 

There are no prerequisites to becoming great. 

You could be raised by a pack of wolves. 

You could be homeless and illiterate at thirty years old and graduate from Harvard at forty. 

You could be one of the most accomplished people in the country and still be hungrier and work harder than everybody else you know as you attempt to conquer a new field. 

And it all starts with a commitment to looking beyond your known world. 

Beyond your street, town, state, or nationality. 

Beyond culture and identity. 

Only then can true self-exploration begin.  After that comes the real work. 

Fighting those demons every morning and all day long is maddening. 

Because they only ever want to break you down. 

They don’t encourage you or make you feel good about yourself or your long odds as you fight through all the toxic mold and crust that is self-hate, doubt, and loneliness. 

They want to limit you. 

They want you to surrender and retreat back to what you know. 

They want you to quit before you get to pliability, where the sacrifice, hard work, and isolation that felt so heavy for so long become your haven. 

Where after struggling to visualize greatness for years, it is effortless. 

That’s when momentum will gather like an updraft and send you airborne and spiraling toward the outer limits of your known world. 

It’s time to level-up and seek out that blue-to-black line. 

The line that separates good from great. 

It is within each one of us. 

#GreatnessIsAttainable #NeverFinished Chapter Nine    9. 

Wringing Out the Soul My eyes snapped open six minutes before my alarm started chirping. 

Sometimes, 0530 comes even earlier than that sounds. 

In my SEAL days, I woke up before the sun to take souls and wasted no time getting after it. 

But that April morning, I had to will myself to move an inch at a time. 

My left side was bruised purple from my hip to my ribs. 

My intercostal muscles were sore enough that even breathing hurt. 

My neck was so stiff that I could barely turn my head. 

We were two weeks into smokejumper rookie training and deep into ground school, and it was Parachute Landing Falls (PLF) season in Fort St. 

John. 

For most of the day, my old, broken body would be bouncing off the frozen ground over and over again. 

I palmed my vibrating phone from the nightstand and peeled myself off the mattress. 

I hadn’t felt this exhausted and sore since I was twenty-four years old. 

Back then, I did whatever it took to lose the weight and make it through SEAL training because I knew that would change everything. 

I’d be able to leave Indiana behind, gain self-respect and confidence, and infuse my life with meaning. 

But now, there was literally nothing riding on this. 

I hadn’t even told many people where I was or what I was doing. 

I had zero external motivation and all of the pain. 

Every morning, I asked myself the same question. 

Why am I putting myself through this? I wasn’t lacking in self-confidence or in search of meaning, and I didn’t need a paycheck. 

Simply put, this is just who I am. 

I could practically hear my bones creak as I stood up slowly, shuffled to the window, and pulled back the curtain. 

Another foot of snow had fallen overnight, and it was still coming down heavy. 

We’d expected it to be cold in Northern British Columbia, but this was something beyond. 

It was the coldest spring they’d had in as long as anyone could remember. 

When it wasn’t raining, it was snowing, and the shifting north winds had a way of cutting you to the bone.  There was a time when all it would take was a hard rain pelting the roof above my bed at 0100 to ignite the savage in me. 

I took nasty weather like a taunting. 

It stripped away the gauzy fog of sleep and lit a fuse. 

The harder it rained or snowed, the longer I’d run because I knew that nobody would ever do something that miserable if they didn’t have to. 

Some of my favorite runs of all time were the twenty-milers I strung out along Lake Michigan during the notorious Chicago winters, but that was some time ago. 

I glanced over at Kish, all cozied up and sound asleep. 

Technically, I wasn’t required to report to the base until 0800, and that bed was reaching out and tempting me back into her arms, so I turned to that window again and watched the snow fall. 

It looked to me like hell had frozen over, and that was my cue. 

I suited up in a thermal top, regular running shorts, and a beanie, slipped on a pair of heated gloves, and went out for a nine-mile run. 

I didn’t want to. 

The pain in my left leg was medieval first thing in the morning, but I didn’t have any wiggle room. 

I wasn’t on my own schedule anymore. 

For the past seven years, I’d been able to train when I wanted to. 

I could schedule everything else around my runs and gym workouts to optimize my fitness and performance. 

Now, I was a grunt again, and I could not afford to turn up at the base too stiff to function. 

Those early morning runs were non-negotiable for this forty-seven-year-old rookie because almost everybody else in my rookie class was in their early or mid- twenties. 

Most of them came from backwoods Canada and grew up playing ice hockey six months a year. 

They had opted out of Generation Soft, and a handful were determined to race against me with everything they had. 

I respected that, but if you come for the old head’s crown, there will be some push back. 

Which is a long way of saying that it didn’t matter if my body couldn’t bounce back like theirs. 

Or that I had to eat cleaner food, stretch in the morning and at night, and prioritize recovery. 

It didn’t matter if I had to sleep less because there are only so many hours in a day. 

If that’s what it took, I was a willing warrior. 

Willing warriors don’t reach for excuses. 

While it’s human nature to try and talk yourself out of doing the hard or inconvenient thing, we know that it’s non-  negotiable. 

There are a lot of people out there who are willing to sign up for the military or police force, apply for a job, or enroll in college or graduate school because they expect some tangible and timely return on their investment. 

Warriors aren’t in it for cash or benefits. 

That’s all gravy. 

Even though I was broke, I would have found a way to pay the U.S. 

Navy to be a SEAL. 

Nobody recruited me to Fort St. 

John, and I lost money by taking the job. 

But willing warriors seek out our own missions and pay any and all tolls required. 

I wanted to do this job, period. 

It was freezing, and I was sore, but my bruises and that nasty weather didn’t give a damn about me, and rest assured, that feeling was mutual. 

Because I was not content to just show up hoping to graduate. 

When you’re on the older side of the age spectrum, you often get more credit than you deserve for simply showing up to do something physically challenging. 

Nobody expects much from you, and the temptation is there to perform to those very low expectations. 

Showing up is an important first step, but if you plan to show up, you may as well show out. 

Nothing had been plowed yet. 

I bashed through powder on the feeder streets to reach the highway, where I ran in fresh, slushy tire tracks laid down by pickup trucks and big rigs. 

Fort St. 

John is populated by early risers who work on local ranches, in the oil and gas industry, or in the endless acreage of spruce and northern pine forests, and they love to drive fast on that icy highway. 

My feet numbed out pretty quick, and the snow intensified to near blizzard conditions. 

Snow and ice pelted my face as I squinted and ran into oncoming traffic. 

Often, I had to dash from the middle of the road to the safety of the deeper snow on the shoulder, and whenever I was able to catch a glimpse of the driver, I found inspiration in their wide eyes of wonder and shocked expressions at having watched me materialize from the snowstorm, like a creature from another realm, a halo of steam pouring off me. 

They all seemed to be asking themselves the same question: “Is he crazy, or is that the most driven guy I’ve ever seen?” Every footprint on that highway and each street I ran down belonged to me. 

Nobody else in town was out on foot. 

Most of the other rookies were still fast asleep. 

But beatdown at forty-seven years old after all I’d accomplished, I was still getting the same double takes I got back when I was in my mid- to late twenties. 

And that lit me up like a torch.  My injuries no longer mattered. 

The pain that awaited me in rookie training in just a few hours made no difference to me at all. 

My body was warming up, and my mind was hardening into cast iron yet again. 

It took close to nine miles, but the savage was ready for whatever the powers that be had planned. 

The two fastest runners in class when it came to the shorter distances were a guy I called Prefontaine (PF) and another nicknamed Hard Charger (HC). 

Both were in their early twenties, and on day one of training, when we went through a string of fitness tests, they beat me on the mile-and-a-half sprint. 

No one knew yet that I was just nine months out of surgery with a plate in my leg. 

Or that my time of 8:25 was only fifteen seconds off my personal best, set when I was a teenager in the Air Force. 

I was stoked with my performance. 

They were great athletes. 

To know that I was their parents’ age and still able to hang with them was a reminder that I was still as hard as woodpecker lips. 

A lot of the PT we did came with unknown distance and time because when fighting a fire, you never know when the exertion, the work, or the suffering might end, and the instructors wanted to see how our minds and bodies responded to the unknown element. 

That was tailor-made for me. 

The longer the run, the heavier the pack, the more intense the gym session, the greater the suck, the better I got. 

Those young guns may have been faster on the short course, but I almost always outlasted them. 

On one ruck, HC and I broke free from the group. 

I pushed the pace, and he stayed on my shoulder. 

We were running flat out, and after a few miles of hard running, his breath turned rusty and thick. 

He sounded like a bulldog in heat but refused to let me drop him and was unwilling to stop. 

He’d stopped once before at the end of a different long run we’d done together after work. 

This time, he made it to the finish line, breathing like his lungs were flipping inside out, and we finished side by side, both of us spent. 

I turned to him, nodded, and said, “That’s what I’m talking about.” I was proud of him, but I was also proud of myself. 

I’d had a minimal amount of time to get in shape to qualify for one of the hardest jobs in the world. 

It had been a demanding journey, with agony an ever-present shadow. 

Yet at thirteen weeks post- surgery, I rode my bike 444 miles. 

At eight months, I ran forty-eight miles in forty- five hours, and at nine months, I was challenging twenty-somethings in everything from running to rucking to pull-ups to hauling heavy gear a very long way. 

But I wasn’t out to take their souls. 

This young group inspired me. 

I wanted to push them  like they were pushing me because they were the next generation of hard, and though I did like winning my fair share of runs and workouts, I liked it even better when they got me. 

When I arrived at work after my nine-mile run, I took one look at my classmates, and it was obvious that we were all suffering. 

I was the most experienced medic on the base, and some of them came to me for help with shin splints and stress-fracture symptoms. 

One had been concussed, and all of us had sore necks because when you are falling from three to four feet with a helmet on, your neck muscles get worked. 

Morale was low. 

Everyone was dragging, and our esprit de corps was nowhere to be found when we were instructed to line up and start hammering out push-ups. 

Smokejumping requires a lot of upper body and core strength. 

The jumping and landing are physically demanding; plus, we would have to ruck with at least sixty pounds of hose on our backs, as well as chainsaws, pumps, and various other fire equipment—none of it light. 

Oftentimes, we’d be hauling water pumps and moving logs with no vehicle support. 

It’s on us to take any gear air-dropped for us and move it into the proper position. 

To help prepare us for that, the instructors unleashed a steady onslaught of push-ups throughout training, among other strength-building workouts and calisthenics. 

There was no telling when or how many we’d have to do each day. 

We just knew they were coming, all day long. 

That morning, our form and cadence were all over the place. 

Some of us hammered them out with ease. 

Others suffered and were clearly demoralized. 

After we finished, I gathered the group and told them that when it came time for the next set, we were going to do it differently and work together. 

A short while later, when one of the instructors called for push-ups, everyone waited for me to hit the floor first. 

“Ready!” I yelled, once I’d assumed the position. 

“Ready!” they hollered and hit the deck. 

Then we began at my pace.  “Down!” I bellowed. 

“One,” they called back. 

“Down!” “Two!” “Down!” “Three!” Sounding off in military cadences serves a few purposes. 

It helps you breathe, releases a shot of adrenaline, and builds up morale. 

To the uninformed, it may look and sound like unnecessary ra-ra-ra, but if you’re part of an exhausted, physically and mentally taxed team, that kind of camaraderie turns something monotonous and brutal into an empowering rite of passage. 

You aren’t even doing push-ups anymore. 

You are becoming one with the team, merging with a common energy force, and that helps everyone stay on course to get through each day, each module of training. 

We all grew to love those push-ups! It felt good to be at the top of the class when it came to physical training, but my struggles didn’t begin and end first thing in the morning. 

Before beginning PLFs each day, we had to suit up in our Kevlar jumpsuits in under three minutes, and given that my body was still healing post-surgery and that everything we did was outside in below-freezing temperatures, I had some complications to deal with.  I struggled to get down on my knees, and my old friend Raynaud’s was back with a vengeance because I couldn’t use the heated gloves during training. 

My fingertips lost all dexterity within minutes. 

I couldn’t feel them or all the little zips, straps, and snaps. 

So it took me longer than everyone else—and much longer than the allotted three minutes—to slip into the suit, secure my reserve chute on my chest, and cinch my ditty bag between my legs. 

The young guys got a kick out of watching me struggle to get dressed. 

For the first time, I looked my age to them, and they gave me a boatload of grief. 

But come PT time, they always kept their mouths shut because they knew I would be bringing the pain. 

As usual, the PLFs were cruel to every one of us. 

The unforgiving cold made the ground harder and our bodies tense and more brittle, which magnified the misery, whether we were jumping from a twelve-inch ledge, a three-foot platform, or climbing up to a different platform, swinging out on a trapeze, and letting go. 

It was all about building muscle memory so we could embody what the instructors called the “proper landing attitude.” When most people jump off anything high, they have a reflex to spread their arms and legs and look down as they drop. 

We were taught to keep our bodies in a tight formation, feet and knees together. 

Pinning the legs together allows you to distribute and absorb the impact. 

We weren’t trying to stick the landing. 

We’d be moving much too fast for that. 

We practiced hitting the ground and rolling to one side. 

As every jump provides different elements and conditions, we had to be comfortable rolling right and left, forward and backward, and we alternated our reps. 

None of this was brand new to me because I was one of the few rookies with prior jump experience. 

I’d jumped from a variety of altitudes and aircraft with a reasonably wide range of gear, but I hadn’t jumped on a static line since my Navy SEAL days, and it did take time for me to get my technique together. 

Everyone had a more-challenging side, and because I was so concerned about protecting my left leg from direct impact, my hip and ribs took a beating whenever I rolled left. 

I absorbed the escalating pain because Dr. 

Gomoll’s words were still tacked to the bulletin board in my brain. 

If the leg wanted to break, it would have to wait for a real jump. 

No matter how purple and swollen I became, I wasn’t about to expose that tibia on a jump from a metal platform or the arc of a janky trapeze. 

That probably explained my general lack of fluidity. 

After each PLF, the instructors critiqued our form, and the word I heard the most was “clunky.”  After several days of throwing myself into the dirt, we were leveled up to the shock tower, a twenty-foot platform where we sat in a mock-up of an aircraft doorway, clipped into a stiff bungee, and practiced our exits. 

The exercise included a ten-foot fall arrested by a sudden snapback that delivered a kiss of mild whiplash. 

On one of my early attempts, I stood behind a small but athletic young woman who I call PB for pit bull because she was very friendly with plenty of fight coiled deep inside her. 

But when she got that smack on the back from the instructor signaling that it was her time to take that leap of faith, she froze up. 

PB is as God-fearing as they come. 

I watched my tongue around her because profanity made her uncomfortable. 

Boat Crew Two Goggins would have continued cursing like the sailor he was and forced her to deal with it. 

And when fear paralyzed her in the middle of an evolution, he may have laughed out loud. 

However, while my inner savage was alive and well, I was no longer that guy. 

Back in SEAL training, I loved when people froze up and quit. 

I felt it elevated me in some way, but that was ego-driven immaturity and poor leadership. 

These days, I consider it my business to make everyone better, no matter the job or situation. 

During my interview with the North Peace Smokejumpers, I was asked to describe my best quality. 

“If you hire me,” I said, “everyone in my class will graduate. 

That’s my best quality.” It wasn’t an empty promise. 

It was an oath. 

“Do you want some time?” the instructor asked. 

“Yeah, I do,” PB said. 

One of the elements that made me want to work with this smokejumping crew was their acceptance of and respect for every individual. 

Although there were standards to be met and exceeded and they did push us to excel, they understood that everyone has a process to work through. 

However, I know from experience that more time to think would not help PB in this situation.  Watching her felt like I was seeing myself in the surf zone at the beginning of my second Hell Week, looking like a stag frozen in the glow of an onrushing eighteen- wheeler. 

I could tell from the vacancy in her eyes that she wasn’t having much fun anymore and that this jump petrified her, but some fears must be conquered immediately. 

The only thing that could possibly help PB in that moment was to stop thinking, look her fear dead in the eye, and jump anyway. 

When she backed away and suggested I take her place, I shook my head. 

“Don’t do that. 

Stay in the door and reset.” We locked eyes. 

“If you freeze up now, it will happen again, but up there, when it’s for real. 

So, when you get to the door, as scary as it is, sound off to get your adrenaline going. 

Focus on the horizon, and when that smack on the back comes, slingshot out of here.” She nodded, determined, got into position, took a deep breath, and yelled, “Am I clear?!” “Get ready,” replied the instructor, and the instant he smacked her between the shoulder blades, PB became a cannonball. 

My leadership style in Fort St. 

John was chameleonic. 

To some of my classmates, I was their medic. 

To others, I doled out tough love in the heat of a difficult moment. 

I competed with the best athletes to make them even better, and I took calls at night from those who didn’t think they’d make it to graduation. 

But I’m not sure how many understood that I too was in danger of missing the cut because of a certain skill that I literally could not grasp. 

Unlike military paratroopers, who almost always jump into terrain with few, if any, natural obstacles, smokejumpers have to land in tight drop zones (DZ). 

In ground school, we were taught to seek out alternates when mistakes have been made or winds shifted and that primary DZ remains out of reach. 

There are times when you simply can’t make the DZ, and with forest in every direction, it is inevitable that at one time or another, we will land in the trees, dangling alone and with nobody coming to save us. 

Which is precisely why we do letdown training.  We all carried 150 feet of nylon webbing in one of our leg pockets. 

That was our emergency letdown line. 

We were taught to tie it off overhead on our canopy’s high riser with a series of half-hitches, then use it to rappel down safely. 

Theoretically. 

It wasn’t as easy to execute as that might sound because when you’re dangling by a parachute and wearing a helmet, the angles make it difficult to see the riser you’re working with over your shoulder. 

And just because you are caught in a tree does not mean you will stay in that tree. 

It’s best to get down to earth ASAP. 

Which is why this was a timed exercise. 

We were to get it done in under ninety seconds on both the right and left sides come test day, or we could forget about jumping at all. 

I didn’t come close to making the time on my initial attempts because I couldn’t feel the webbing. 

We must have done a dozen daily reps for weeks, but the weather stayed cold, and my hands would not cooperate. 

I fumbled so badly it was borderline uncomfortable for the instructors and any of my classmates who were paying close enough attention. 

Despite my age, everyone had the highest expectations of me. 

I’m supposed to be able to do anything, and I was still over thirty seconds too slow with test day looming. 

Once again, my struggle was on display for all to see, but I never hung my head. 

Everybody stumbled on something at least once nearly every day in that training, and we all have things to work on in life. 

That’s how it should be. 

When you drop your head, you are sending a direct message to your brain that you don’t think you have what it takes to get better. 

That makes it much harder to focus and succeed. 

When you are working toward a goal that is important to you and things don’t go your way, never let anyone see it bring you down. 

Don’t give them the satisfaction. 

When your head’s down, you can’t see where you need to go or what needs to be done. 

And if you need help, ask for it. 

Never be ashamed of it. 

Yes, it was freezing. 

Yes, I struggled mightily, but I did not sulk. 

I kept my head up and got to work. 

I practiced every night for hours. 

At first, I rigged up a simulation of parachute risers with coat hangers in my closet, and before each attempt, I let my bare hands marinate in the freezer, but they never got cold enough, so I moved the operation outside, where I could sink my hands into the snow until I couldn’t feel a thing. 

Then, I stood at the base of a tree and tied off overhead. 

Kish came out to time me, bundled up in three sweaters, two parkas, and multiple winter hats. 

This wasn’t about conditioning my hands to the brutal cold. 

That would never happen because of Raynaud’s. 

But by cranking out these reps for hours, my mind and body synced up. 

I knew exactly where the webbing was and what to do with it,  whether I could feel it or not. 

I chopped three seconds off my time one night. 

Then, another five seconds the next. 

My improvement wasn’t immediate or substantial. 

But it was steady, so I kept at it. 

It was not easy to maintain a positive outlook and commitment to working and training upwards of eighteen hours every day for six weeks. 

There is a reason smokejumping is a young person’s game. 

I arrived in great shape, but I was using my body in a way I hadn’t in years, and the torment was unrelenting. 

I was also mentally worn down. 

This was not the most challenging training I’d been in, but it was an intense struggle because I was a lot older and no longer who I used to be. 

A lot of people let a realization like that limit their future. 

They lose their edge and scale back their ambitions and expectations to protect themselves. 

They retire and quit pushing themselves into uncomfortable environments and challenging situations. 

Much of that has to do with the age pass down. 

There’s a pass down for everything in life. 

When it comes to age, we seem to share a common misperception of how we should feel or where we should be based on a number when sometimes, the problem isn’t chronological. 

Often it isn’t Father Time that is jacking you up but his brother, Father Fatigue. 

They say that you can’t beat Father Time, and that may be true, but you can definitely make his brother feel your resistance, and if you are willing to outlast the headwinds of fatigue minute by minute, hour by hour, day after day, you can at least meet Father Time face to face and negotiate with him. 

Whenever I felt too tired or sore to get out of bed, I kept my eyes on the horizon and reminded myself that smokejumper training is temporary. 

Some mornings, it actually felt good to be so sore because that was a sign that I was still willing to turn myself inside out to look for that blue-to-black line and do something that spoke to my soul. 

True, I was not the same David Goggins. 

I was a much better version. 

I used to think you had to be the best at everything to be great and to be a strong leader. 

That’s not the case. 

The valiant one is the person who faces long odds yet continues to try. 

When those young studs saw me running in the snow before work, it messed with them. 

And when word got out that this supposedly bigger-than-life forty- seven-year-old savage was putting his hands in the snow and placing them back on the let-down line for hours, hunting a physiological adaptation, it showed them what it looks like to refuse to be denied, what it means to be never finished. 

It reminded them that this opportunity was special and that they probably had a lot more to give too.  I made the let-down time on test day. 

Not by much, but I made it. 

I dressed in under three minutes too, and while I didn’t land or roll like a gymnast or ballerina, I proved my consistency and capability to the instructors and to Tom Reinboldt, founder of the North Peace Smokejumpers, and graduated ground school. 

“I can see it doesn’t come naturally,” Tom told me later. 

Like me, he’d survived a tough childhood and was drifting as a young man until he found smokejumping. 

At twenty-seven, after a health scare, he launched his own unit and built a culture centered on respect and excellence. 

None of it was easy or came naturally to him either, which is exactly why I wanted to be there. 

“It’s good you’re not a natural,” said Tom. 

“I can see your will, and I respect that.” A few days later, in early May, we were rallied for a mock-up drill. 

We suited up in our armored gear, which included that Kevlar jumpsuit as well as a helmet with a grate protecting our faces, and walked to the air strip. 

Our first jump was scheduled for the following morning, weather depending, and our instructors wanted us to squeeze into the Twin Otter, the smaller of the two aircraft in the unit. 

The point of a mock-up is to get familiar with the aircraft and where and when to clip into the static line. 

This bird looked well used. 

The tang of jet fuel wafted down the aisle and crawled into my sinuses as we loaded up, and that stirred something in me as I sat down. 

My pulse quickened. 

My skin rippled with anticipation, but it was just a drill, and after a briefing, we disembarked into a truck. 

That’s when the instructor asked us to do it one more time. 

As I reboarded the plane, I sensed that this wasn’t another drill, and then spotted the pilot make for the cockpit door. 

They were shotgunning us. 

The second we were seated, the pilot fired his propellers without giving us any time to think or back out. 

Two minutes later, we were airborne and climbing to 1,500 feet. 

When we reached altitude, the designated spotter tossed out his paper streamers to estimate wind speed. 

I watched them unfurl in the thermals as he pointed out the DZ. 

It was a bluebird day, the wind was light at three to five knots, and we arced in long loops. 

One by one, we stood up, made our way to the static line, got on our knees,  and clipped in. 

I was one of the last to jump and was calm, if uncertain, as I stuck my pin into the line and locked it. 

This is it, I thought. 

This is where the leg breaks and the dream dies. 

That was the plain truth, but I took comfort in getting this far. 

At least I’d get one jump in. 

And if it was my first and last, I’d better make it sing. 

The spotter gave me the wind drift, pointed out the DZ, and listed the hazards. 

The plane banked toward my exit point, and I sounded off. 

“Am I clear?!” We were traveling at ninety knots, but my pulse was surprisingly smooth as I kicked one leg out the open door. 

“Get ready,” he said. 

Despite the chill, sweat tickled the back of my neck as time slowed way down until the moment the spotter slapped my back. 

“Push thousand!” I yelled and used both hands to push out the door and into the sky on a static line for the first time in fourteen years. 

“Two thousand, three thousand, four thousand!” There is no rip cord to pull on static line jumps—unless you need to trigger your reserve, that is—and it only took about five seconds for my canopy to open with a violent tug. 

“Check thousand!” I looked up and inspected my canopy for holes or twists. 

My suspension lines were mildly twisted, but I recognized it, pulled my risers, kicked my legs as if riding a bicycle, and rotated out in a blink. 

The chute filled out, and I slowed down even more. 

It steered like a barge. 

There was an eerie delay when I toggled left or right, but I read the wind well and maneuvered into it while I fell at a rate of about seventeen and a half feet per second. 

That feels pretty fast as the ground rushes toward you, but I wasn’t looking down. 

I held steady, eyes out front, and tapped the ground with my feet and knees together. 

I felt a bolt of pain in my left shin as I rolled right, but it didn’t last.  The leg held! An instructor ran over, breathless yet reasonably impressed. 

He offered a few pointers and a hand, and as I got to my feet, I found that I could not stop smiling. 

It wasn’t that evil Goggins smile either. 

This one was wide and natural, and well- earned.  The smile is because I thought for sure the leg was going to break! (Photo by: Greg Jones) For the next two weeks, as we kept jumping, the DZs got tighter and tighter. 

There were no more open fields, just tiny divots in the woods. 

A lot of the trees had been ravaged by beetles, but those trunks still managed to stand sentinel, like a zombie forest. 

From above, they looked like spikes. 

Those weren’t the only hazards. 

There were boulders, rivers, lakes, bogs, downed trees, and thorny shrubs. 

And there were plenty of live evergreens trying to reach out and grab us too. 

On most jumps, at  least one of our classmates got hung up. 

One caught the top of a ninety-foot conifer, and it barely held him. 

He was lucky because once his chute lost air, it was worthless, and the fall would have killed him. 

There were times when the DZ was hard to make out from the bird, and the wind was wildly variable. 

The spotter’s wind-drift intel was usually outdated within minutes, so if you weren’t one of the first to jump, you’d have to figure it out on your ninety-second drop. 

That made it all the more difficult to avoid every hazard as I searched for the orange X laid out by the instructors. 

I never got caught in a tree, but I clipped one with my shoulder on one jump, got spun around in a shifting wind, and landed hard and fast on another. 

It gave the instructors a scare, but I was glad it happened because once again, my leg absorbed the impact, and from then on, I knew for sure that it was good to go. 

My body was healing up. 

The bruises had faded for the most part, and my intercostal muscles released. 

I could breathe free and clear by the final days of rookie training, and everything had slowed down for me. 

I read the wind well, steered with more confidence, zoomed closer to that X early on, and started hitting my mark with precision. 

There was no pomp and circumstance come graduation, which was another sign I was exactly where I was supposed to be. 

A couple of the instructors said a few words, then handed us our uniforms, and that was that. 

All but one candidate graduated from our class, which spoke to how strong my class was and how much we came together as a team. 

HC looked stoked, and PB was beaming. 

She’d evolved from not being able to jump off a twenty-foot platform to becoming one of the very best jumpers in our rookie class. 

I was proud of myself too because it had been just ten and a half months since the surgery that turned my smokejumper aspirations into mission impossible. 

And it had taken every ounce of endurance, dedication, and faith I had to make it. 

Now that I had, while it felt satisfying, I was old enough and had done enough hard-core jobs to know something that the happy young rooks did not. 

The hard part had just begun.  I’d seen how perilous and serious this job was. 

Each jump was high risk, and while we’d all been challenged to our depths, everything we had done to that point had been a mere training ground. 

In training, you can miss the X. 

You can get caught in trees. 

Now that we were operational, every detail had to be dialed in. 

On a fire, there is no time to mess around getting out of trees or hiking out of the bush in search of your crew while they wait on you. 

All the other rookies were smiling that afternoon. 

I was focused on the fight to come. 

That mentality to always be looking for the next mission was a product of experience, but not only military experience. 

I’ve been discovering, developing, refining, and adapting that mindset my entire life. 

Many people snicker or smirk in disbelief when they watch me take on a new challenge, as if to say, “Why would anybody do that?” The implication is that I’m doing it to get noticed, to fill up on atta’ boys, or for a payday. 

Let’s make one thing clear: Before you knew me, I was a Cub Scout, a Webelo, and a Boy Scout. 

Before you knew me, I was in Civil Air Patrol and Junior ROTC. 

Then I joined the Air Force. 

I joined the Navy. 

I went to Ranger School. 

I went to Delta Selection. 

And now, I am a North Peace Smokejumper, operating from a remote airfield in Northern British Columbia. 

Do you think this just ends? I repeat: this is who I am! At almost every stop along the way, there have been very few people who looked like me. 

I wasn’t the first Black Navy SEAL, and I’m not the first Black smokejumper. 

Back in the 1940s, there was a team of Black smokejumpers called the Triple Nickles who fought forest fires in the American West, but their contribution was not well publicized and unfortunately is largely forgotten. 

Today, it is all too rare to find a Black person fighting wildfires anywhere in North America. 

But it doesn’t matter where you come from or what you look like, we are all hindered by supposedly fixed social lines. 

Whatever your gender, culture, religion, or age, there are things that you’ve been told your kind just does not do. 

Which is why there has got to be somebody in every family, neighborhood, culture, nation, and generation who breaks the mold and changes the way others think about society and their place in it. 

There has got to be someone willing to be an outlier. 

A savage who sees those walls and barriers that are constantly trying to close us off and divide us up and then breaks them down again by showing everyone what is possible. 

There’s got to be someone who demonstrates greatness and makes everyone around them think differently.  Why not you? The road to success is rarely a straight line. 

For me, it’s always been more like a maze. 

Many times, when I thought I’d finally cracked the code, had it all figured out, and found the straight path to certain victory, I hit a wall or got spun into a turnaround. 

When that happens, we have two choices. 

We can stay stuck or regroup, back up, and try again. 

That’s where evolution begins. 

Hitting those walls time and again will harden and streamline you. 

Having to back up and formulate a new plan without any assurances it will ever pan out will tune your SA up and develop your problem- solving skills and your endurance. 

It will force you to adapt. 

When that happens hundreds of times over the course of many years, it is physically exhausting and mentally draining, and it becomes damn near impossible to believe in yourself or your future. 

A lot of people abandon belief at that point. 

They swirl in the eddies of comfort or regret, perhaps claim their victimhood, and stop looking for their way out of the maze. 

Others keep believing and find a way out but hope to never slip into a trap like that ever again, and those skills they’d honed and developed whither. 

They lose their edge. 

I am always on the hunt for another twisted pretzel of a maze to get lost in because that’s where I find myself. 

The smooth road to success is of no use to savages like me. 

That may sound ideal, but it won’t test us. 

It doesn’t demand belief, so it will never make us great. 

We all build belief in different ways. 

I clock countless hours in the gym, where I log thousands of reps and run and ride my bike obscene distances, to cultivate belief. 

Despite what you may think, I don’t consider myself an ultra-athlete because those races are not who I am. 

They are tools. 

Each one provides me a stockpile of faith so when I get stuck in the maze of life like a broke- down savage, I still believe I am capable of achieving my unreasonable goals, such as becoming a smokejumper at forty-seven years old, no matter what society or the good doctor says. 

I don’t mean to suggest that you must run one hundred or two hundred miles to believe you have what it takes to get where you want to go. 

That’s what I had to do based on the depth of the darkness I came from and the scale of my ambitions. 

But if you’ve lost it, you do need to find your way back to belief. 

Whatever it takes for you to believe that you’re better than good enough to achieve your dreams is what  you must do. 

And remember, your greatness is not tied to any outcome. 

It is found in the valiance of the attempt. 

My crew was one of four on standby when the winds picked up and thunderheads blew across Northern British Columbia. 

We were on our satellite base in Mackenzie when the call came in mid-morning that there had been a lightning strike and a three-acre fire was burning outside of Fort Nelson. 

Although I’d graduated rookie training, you aren’t officially a smokejumper until you jump your first fire, and I was about to be baptized. 

Our three-man crew hopped into the DC-3 —a refurbished World War II relic—with three other crews, enough firefighting gear to put the burn down, and two days of food and water. 

We flew for ninety minutes until we reached the billowing black smoke, and leveled off at 1,500 feet. 

The streamers flew, and the spotter pointed out an overgrown pipeline corridor, no more than twenty feet across, roughly a quarter mile from the flames. 

That was the DZ. 

Kneeling in the open doorway, the spotter shouted the wind drift and the hazard rundown over the roar of the propellers. 

Roger that, I thought. 

“Am I clear?!” I hollered. 

The plane rattled and shook. 

It was so loud, I could barely hear myself think. 

My pounding heart sent a flood of adrenaline rocketing through me. 

Locked into the static line, I stepped to the door, grabbed the outside edges with both hands, and flung myself into the sky in time to watch a teammate’s parachute bloom 150 feet below me. 

Once my chute opened, the rumble of the propellors and wild hiss of the wind melted to a peaceful whisper. 

I looked down, located my DZ, identified all the hazards, and took in the full scope of the fire. 

There was danger in every direction, yet all I saw was beauty. 

My body had failed me for eight years straight. 

I could have given up a dozen different times at least. 

Many late nights and early mornings, my doubt was louder than that DC-3. 

I had to sit with that doubt, stare into it, and, more often than not, I had no answers, no good reason to think I would ever get here because I kept falling short for one reason or another. 

It’s easier to overcome doubt that you’ve built up in your mind. 

It’s much harder when you know you’ve failed more than once and that the odds of success are slim. 

But because of the way I live and thanks  to the mindset I work hard to cultivate, I had enough belief left to try one more time. 

Nothing in my life has ever happened for me on the first try. 

It took me three cracks to get through Navy SEAL training. 

I had to take the ASVAB five times and failed twice before breaking the Guinness World Record for most pull ups in twenty-four hours. 

But by then, failure had long since been neutralized. 

When I set an unreasonable goal and fall short, I don’t even look at it as failure anymore. 

It is simply my first, second, third, or tenth attempt. 

That is what belief does for you. 

It takes failure out of the equation completely because you go in knowing the process will be long and arduous, and that is what we do. 

I wish I could more fully express what it’s like to defy the medical mind to parachute into wildfires at forty-seven years old. 

I find the sensation almost impossible to describe. 

All I can say is that I hope you and everyone else get to feel this one day because to overcome all obstacles and bump up against the outer reaches of your capabilities is the pinnacle. 

In those rare, fleeting moments when you are washed in the sense of infinite possibility and overwhelmed with glory, everything they ever did to you or put in front of you—all of the disrespect, knockdowns, and breakdowns, and every bit of the pain, doubt, and humiliation—is worth it. 

But the only way to get there is to continually seek greatness and always be willing to try one more time. 

I never needed to be the hardest person in the world. 

That became a goal because I knew it would bring out my best self. 

Which is what this messed-up world needs from all of us: to evolve into the very best versions of ourselves. 

That’s a moving target, and it isn’t a one-time task. 

It is a lifelong quest for more knowledge, more courage, more humility, and more belief. 

Because when you summon the strength and discipline to live like that, the only thing limiting your horizons is you.    Jumping into the G90317 fire in June 2022  Second fire jump of the season     Acknowledgments To Jennifer Kish, who would do whatever it takes to help me reach my outer limits. 

You have been around for some of the most difficult times that I ever had to endure. 

Thank you for showing your steady hand. 

You have redefined what “ride or die” means. 

Adam Skolnick: Thank you for showing up every day with an open mind and the attitude required for setting a new bar that will be impossible for many to achieve. 

This book is one for the ages. 

Jacqueline Gardner: Like always, Mom, my thank-yous can only truly be understood by you. 

If only he could see us now! Neither one of us turned out the way he said. 

Dr. 

Andreas Gomoll: Many more chapters of my life will be written because of your work. 

It will end one day, but not today. 

JeVon McCormick and Scribe Media: JeVon, in a world of crooked people always looking for an angle, I thank you and your team for having character. 

The character to take care, not take advantage, of each and every one of your clients. 

The work you all do is second to none. 

Joe Rogan: Your friendship and support have been very meaningful throughout the years. 

It shows what kind of a man you are that you not only believe that there is enough success for everyone but do your part to help facilitate that for others. 

It takes a rare combination of confidence and security to be willing to do that.  Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson: When it comes to big-time celebrities, you are the example that others need to follow. 

Your humility speaks volumes about your character. 

Saying “Stay hard” to you is wasted breath. 

Stay real, DJ! Tom Reinboldt: You created a special culture in a world where humility is all too often lost. 

You have built an environment that not only teaches leaders how to lead but also how to follow. 
